[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 O 3 8 8 71ED U.S. Departrnent of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690388 Date: 06/16/2021 
. is a belated reply to your go()OWARIPIRIC%Ne 4 and 
r;iper building on the NDU Haiti symposium. All of us who 
ale working on Haiti appreciate NDU's effOrts to look down the 
road a bit and develop recommendations as to what we should do 
to sustain the success of our policy. With that in mind, I 
wanted to offer a few substantive reflections on your letter. 
As you note, we've been trying hard to keep Haiti moving 
forward simultaneously on both the economic and law 
enforcement/security fronts. I'm very encouraged by what we've 
seen so far from President Preval, and am confident that view 
is shared by many Haitians. Indeed, the growing public support 
for Preval's economic modernization program may be helping to 
resolve the Aristide factor you flagged in your letter. The 
pace of implementation is obviously a problem, but we are 
firmly convinced of Preval's commitment to implement the 
necessary reforms. 
On the police front, Haiti's progress.under Preval's 
leadership is embodied in Pierre Denize, the very impressive 
new director of the HNP. We're working assiduously to signal 
our support to Denize and his subordinates and have developed a 
generally constructive dialogue with the hill on police 
assistance issues. Indeed, it's worth noting there are 
currently no holds on any U.S. assistance to Haiti aside from 
those we have ourselves placed on certain non-humanitarian 
programs as part of our agreement to respect the spirit of the 
Dole Amendment. On the specific issue of police assistance, we 
are making equipment and training available as fast as the HNP 
can absorb it. 
None of this is to suggest we are out of the woods. As the-
NDU paper points out, and as the UN signaled with last week's 
approval of UNSMIH, Haiti still needs the visible support of 
the international community. However, in relative terms, we 
have come quite a distance. Good advice from friends like you 
will keep us moving in the right direction. 
Sincerely, 
Strobe Talbott 
Ambassador Robert Oakley 
National Defense University 
Department of Defense 
Washington, D.C. 20319-6000 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690388 Date: 06/16/2021