[Page 1]
C 0 66 9 8 1 91:1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019 
_i _ attersis p liotys 
DECAPTIONED 
Talbott-Mamedov Meeting in Buenos Aires 
on the margins of Menem inaugural 
July 9, 1995, 9-llam 
Nuland and Zamyatin, notetakers 
Schedule for the Fall: 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 15/11‘0-1 c: 
A fr' c
Mamedov asked that the Strategic Stability talks be scheduled to 
mesh with his travel to New York with Kozyrev for the UNGA arid P-8 
Ministerial dinner on September 26. We agreed to hold the formal 
Strategic Stability group meeting on Thursday, September 21 in 
Annapolis if possible, with follow-on consultations as necessary iri 
Washington on Friday, September 22. 
On the fall Summit, Mamedov reaffirmed that Yeltsin wants to meet 
bilaterally right after the October 22 UNSC Summit in New York. 
Mamedov again suggested that we propose a university venue close to 
New York City (e.g., Long Island, New Jersey) and also firm up the 
dates soonest with Shevchenko (action: Chip). 
On Gore-Chernomyrdin, Mamedov said he didn't have instructions, but 
he was concerned about trying to schedule the meeting in December 
after the Russian elections and before Christmas; Chernomyrdin 
would not be able to concentrate on the meeting until the last 
minute and the fallout from the elections would not be clear. 
Instead, he suggested we consider scheduling the meeting around 
January 16-17. Strobe undertook to take this up with Leon Fuerth. 
Given President Clinton's heavy schedule of electoral primaries in 
the spring, Strobe and Mamedov also agreed to coordinate informally 
soon on possible dates for the March/April P-8 Nuclear Safety 
Summit in Moscow. 
NATO:
Mamedov said that, after much debate, all relevant agencies in 
MOSCOW had chopped on a policy paper outliniAg Russia'S'posture 
toward NATO for the next year, which has now been sent to Yeltsin 
for his review. The policy has three basic tenets: 
Russia opposes NATO expansion. This is its official position, 
but Moscow will not make a lot of noise about expansion unless 
it is provoked by expansionist words or deeds from the West. 
If provoked, Moscow will respond "in all channels." If not 
provoked, Moscow will simply agree to disagree with the West 
for now on whether NATO should expand. 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS, 
4/22/2019 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 2]
C06698191=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019 
— SEGRET   NOD,is 
- 2 
In the meantime, Russia wants to build on and strengthen its 
cooperation with "the existing NATO" via the documents they 
have already signed, PFP, the 16 plus one and all other" 
mechanisms. Russia will push cooperation on all fronts 
including: nonproliferation, counter-terrorism, conventional 
weapons, crime, joint exercises under PFP, peacekeeping, etc. 
Russia will also seek to strengthen its bilateral ties with 
all NATO countries. 
Mamedov described this new position as a positive step because it 
breaks the link between Russia's opposition to NATO expansion and 
its willingness to cooperate with NATO. Participation in PFP and 
implementation of the NATO-Russia documents that haVe already been 
signed are no longer going to be "held hostage" to the expansion 
debate. Even the Russian military agrees on this and wants to 
participate in PFP. Mamedov noted Grachev and Perry had a good 
talk on the margins of the GCC. Strobe commented that Grachev's 
positive noises have not yet translated into Russia signing up for 
the Louisiana PFP exercise or anything else. Mamedov said we 
should pursue this in DOD-to-MOD channels because it is 
counterproductive for the MFA to try to push the MOD. 
Regarding the new Russian interagency position on NATO, Strobe 
underscored that it would be counterproductive for Moscow to try to 
use its dialogue with NATO -- or its public diplomacy -- to stop 
expansion. Mamedov agreed, reasserting that Russia would not push 
its position if the West did not provoke it. But, he implied, the 
new policy of "agreeing to disagree" on expansion was necessary to 
buy political time in Moscow -- particularly since it will be "many 
years" before NATO actually expands. "Remember in May, Yeltsin 
told Clinton he needed two years," he said. 
Strobe asked whether the new policy meant Russia would refuse the 
NATO briefing on expansion when it is offered this fall. Mamedov 
said not necessarily; he suggested that rather than having the NATO 
team come to Moscow ("a move that would be as colossally stupid as 
if we were to send you a team to describe our pAans to 
reincorporate Ukraine"), Churkin could receive the briefinij quietly 
in Brussels and send home a cable. That way the whole thing could 
appear routine. At the same time, Mamedov asserted that Russia 
would not raise a fuss if Ukraine received the briefing team in 
Kiev ("if they want to have Germany on their border, it's their 
problem"). 
Implying that the latest interagency position was all the traffic 
would bear in Moscow, Mamedov expressed concern about trying to 
negotiate a Russia-NATO framework document by December. He said it 
might even prove difficult to clear a vague statement of principles 
that went no further than the May U.S.-Russia joint statement on 
Europe or the Noordwijk documents. The process of interagency 
-SECRET/No DL5 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 9 8 191 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019 
SECRET/0 
- 3 - 
negotiation could unravel the delicate compromise now in place in 
Moscow -- especially since all the other agencies think the Russia-
NATO dialogue is just an "empty box you are going to sell us in 
return for our agreement on expansion." December is an "artificial 
deadline." We'll be coping with the NATO briefings and the 
elections; these negotiations on a document could become the 
"detonator on a critical mass of problems." 
Instead, Mamedov suggested we concentrate on concrete cooperation. 
Strobe noted that a good Russia-NATO framework should make 
expansion less threatening to Moscow. Mamedov agreed, saying that 
he and Kozyrev believe the closer Russia gets to NATO, the Aess 
Poland will want to be in it. But they are a minority of two. 
Everyone else -- Primakov, Kharchenko, etc. -- argue Russia will 
end up buying an "empty box." 
After some discussion about the pros and cons of a document of some 
kind in December, particularly given the commitment in the 
Noordwijk communique, Strobe and Mamedov agreed to think about 
different formulas. One idea might be to "catalogue" the progress 
to date in the Russia-NATO relationship and establish a work 
program of cooperation for 1996. Mamedov urged that we settle on 
a formula for the December NAC by October so the two Presidents can 
bless it. He stressed that only Yeltsin can set Russian policy on 
this. As yet another indication of how poisonous this issue is 
back in Moscow, Mamedov said that Chernomyrdin has refused to have 
anything whatsoever to do with NATO+; he figures he has his hands 
full with Chechnya, and doesn't want NATO+ to darken the door of 
GCC. 
Strobe laid down a firm marker that the new Russian position has 
the potential of proving to be a step backward. We moved forward 
in Moscow/Halifax with Yeltsin and Kozyrev agreeing to oppose 
"rapid/accelerated/precipitous" expansion; Moscow's dropping those 
qualifying adjectives could turn out to be a major complication, 
not in Russia's interest. Mamedov sees the problem but thinks that 
we can manage it. We'll see. 
CFE: 
Mamedov handed over an MOD non-paper which responds to the map fix 
proposals Lynn Davis made in London (faxed to NIS). He stressed 
that the main value of the non-paper is that it specifies how much 
equipment the military feels it needs in the flanks. Strobe 
reiterated that an exclusion zone, by any name, is not on. Mamedov 
said, "I've got your message." 
Mamedov noted that the Chechen side in the Grozny peace talks will 
insist on the withdrawal of all or most Russian troops from Groznyy 
as part of the peace package. He held out considerable hope that 
the peace talks would thus solve the "exclusion zone" problem and 
--SECRET--UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 4]
C06698191 =IED U.S. DepartmentofState Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019 
SECRET 4 -c1b45 
- 4 - 
suggested we wait to see the outcome before meeting again on 
flanks. 
When Strobe questioned the wisdom of discussing CFE in Brussels on 
July 17, and thus inviting a semi-public showdown between Russia 
and the Alliance, Mamedov said that Russia was just responding to 
the repeated requests of the Europeans to brief NATO on Russia's 
intentionS. Kislyak and Kharchenko plan to give a briefing which 
will closely resemble their opening presentation at the Davis talks 
in London. NATO can refuse the briefing, or ask to delay it, but 
this could cause problems in Moscow. "Everyone knows NATO is the 
big game; the people in Vienna "are nobodies." 
Bosnia:
Mamedov said that when their Ambassador in Belgrade saw Milosevic 
a few days ago, Milosevic gave the impression that he doesn't 
believe in the Bildt mission. He wants direct talks with the U.S. 
He also indicated he may be ready for a new deal, but provided no 
specifics; after all, Mamedov said, why should he confide in us; he 
wants to talk directly to you, just like the Vietnamese, the North 
Koreans, and the Cubans. Milosevic clearly wants to see how the 
military situation develops. It'll be harder for him to make a 
deal while the Serbs are under fierce attack from the Muslims and 
the Croats. 
Strobe asked if Milosevic can deliver Pale. Alone, he can't, 
Mamedov said. But he can when there are other sticks aimed at the 
Bosnian Serbs like the RRF. Resumed Russian contacts with Pale 
could also help ensure Milosevic delivers because he'll want to 
prove he's still relevant to the process. 
Mamedov said a deal will only work if there's something in it for 
everyone. Milosevic wants sanctions suspension; Karadic wants to 
"save his skin from a big fight with NATO" -- either a direct 
attack or while UNPROFOR is withdrawing. The deal needs to include 
two elements: some face-saving formula on sanctions relief for 
Milosevic and a "loose confederative arrangement" between Belgrade 
and Pale. When Strobe raised objections to a Belgr.ade/Pale 
confederation, Mamedov asserted it would be the lesser of two evils 
to take criticism for accepting a "modest, qualified, gradual" form 
of "Greater Serbia" than to have a "big blow up... with all-out 
war." He said that virtually everyone in Moscow is looking for a 
way to get Russia out of any involvement, diplomatic or otherwise, 
in the Bosnia mess. 
Russian Politics: 
Mamedov predicted that a peace settlement in Chechnya would pay big 
electoral dividends for Chernomyrdin in December. Then, after-he 
—SEGRET-- 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 5]
CO6698191 =IED U.S. DepartmentofState Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 0 7/25/2019 
SECRET, /Wats 
- 5 - 
wins big, Chernomyrdin will use his party machinery to help Yeltsin 
get reelected in June. "He's very loyal. He'll only run against 
Yeltsin if he is provoked" (i.e., by Yeltsin). If Chechnya is not 
settled, it's impossible to predict who'll benefit in°December. 
Perhaps Lebed he's now criticizing the interior troops and the 
military for caving to terrorists in Budennovsk. 
Mamedov repeatedly stressed how well the GCC had gone. 
Chernomyrdin is a businessman. He doesn't believe in fighting 
wars; he believes in cutting deals. 
Mamedov asserted that the "war party" around Yeltsin had been 
greatly weakened by the firing of Yerin and Stepashin. Lobov had 
been weakened too, but he's just down, not out. 
Kozyrev enjoyed a respite from scrutiny during the struggle over 
the security ministries, but Zyuganov continues to attack him, 
calling Kozyrev a liability to the government. Zyuganov's view 
matters because he is perceived to have a lot of grassroots 
support. Kozyrev will duck most of the tough political issues 
through the December elections, but he'll continue to work on NATO 
because he truly believes a good Russia-NATO relationship is the 
best hedge against negative fall-out from expansion. He'll also 
stay active on Bosnia. 
Iran nukes: 
Mamedov said the next step is to develop a paper on where we 
disagree. He implied that Yeltsin and Chernomyrdin won't be able 
to move much on this until they get through their elections. 
Trying to buy,them off with carrots will be counter-productive now 
because they can't afford to appear willing to sell out Russian 
soverignty. 
( 
Chechnya:
In response to Strobe's query about Yeltsin's misstatement in 
Halifax that Dudayev had taken exile in Turkey, Mamediiv said 
Primakov had briefed Yeltsin on talks Dudayev was having with-one 
of Ciller's aides (Mamedov did not know whom). The British had 
corroborated that Dudayev did indeed discuss asylum with a Ciller 
aide. As far as Dudayev actually leaving Russia, that was just 
wishful thinking on Yeltsin's part. 
START II: 
Mamedov said that Lukin will begin hearings and the Duma will "go 
through the motions" but they will not bring the treaty to a vote 
until they have a new parliament, lest it fail. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 6]
C 0 6 6 9 8191 :IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019 
- 6 
Haiti:
Strobe briefed Mamedov on the post-electoral state of play in Haiti 
and our efforts to broker a compromise. He undertook to ensure we 
respond to Kozyrev's letter next week when the situation clarifies. 
ABM : 
Mamedov handed over a non-paper responding to our last proposal 
(faxed to NIS). 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698191 Date: 07/25/2019