[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 7 6 9 4 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 05/29/2019 
NODIS 9611591/1 
4595 
THE WHITE HOUS'E 
WA.SHINGTON .
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
RELEASE IN FULL 
[DECLASSIFIED]
DECAPTIONED 
SUBJECT: Meeting with Prime Minister Chernomyrdin (U) 
PARTICIPANTS: U.S. 
DATE, TIME 
AND PLACE:*
The President 
Warren Ch.ristopher, Secretary of State 
Robert Rubin, Secretary of Treasury 
Anthony Lake, Assistant to the President for 
National Security Affairs 
Laura Tyson, Assistant to the President for 
Economic Policy 
Michael McCurry, Assistant to the President 
and White House Press Secretary 
Lawrence Summers, Deputy Secretary of 
Treasury 
Samuel Berger-, Deputy Assistant to the 
President for National Security Affairs 
Ambassador James Collins, Special Adviser to 
the Secretary for New Independent States 
Coit Blacker (Notetaker), NSC 
Interpreter 
Russia 
Viktor Chernomyrdin, Prime Minister 
Yevgeniy Primakov, Foreign Minister 
Yevgeniy Yasin, Foreign Economic Minister 
Gennadiy Petelin, Prime Minister 
Secretariat Head 
Georgiy Mamedov, Deputy Foreign Minister 
Robert Makaryan, Assist. to Foreign Minister 
Nikolay Spasskiy, MFA USA/Canada Desk Head 
Interpreter 
June 29, 1996, 2:50-3:40 p.m. 
Lyons, Paris 
The President: Thank you for coming. I know this is an 
inconvenient time for you, but it matters that you and your 
delegation have come; your being in Lyons has made a difference. 
Reason: 1.5 (d) 
norl ccifw O. -7/7/n 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 97 6 94 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 05/29/2019 
SECRET 2 
You and I had a chance to talk about the election, so unless you have something else to say we can move on to other issues. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: I don't think I have much to add to what I said yesterday; the line-up remains the same. Our situation is serious. The Communists have strength. So much has not been settled in the life of the common people. We proceed from the assumption that President Yeltsin will win the election. Depending on the outcome of the election, developments will progress further. —(-C-4-
Much will depend on the circumstances, on voter turnout. Will it be the same as the first round? Will it be higher or lower? Zyuganov wants to keep it low. We tried to get the Duma to extend the voting day, but could not get it done. So, much will depend on the circumstances, on developments. -444-
The President: Let's assume it all goes well. What are Zyuganov's long-term prospects? Will he abide by the results? 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: It's hard to say. I met recently with Zyuganov and some of his calleagues, as well as other members of the Zyuganov team. They are not averse to cooperation. They may have an inkling of their inability to win; that is why they have been insisting on forming a coalition 
government. -4.€4.-
They will be in the opposition. The coming election is their last chance. Over the long-term, they will not be a strong force to reckon with. Over the short-term, however, they will be. 4G-)---
The President: What of the partnership with Lebed, its prospects for the long-term? What will be the impact on policy? What does it mean? 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: It will be okay with him; I don't see any major pröblem. Once we put this pre-election heat behind us, everything will fall into place. And everyone will have their own competence. 4E9-
The President: Most of us thought this was a good move, to broaden President Yeltsin's base. The major concern I have was Lebed's comments about "minor" religions in Russia. -(44-
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: They have also caused some concern among us. I am sure this will be overconie. President Yeltsin plans to have a meeting with Yavlinskiy, Lebed and Fyodorov and we have been maintaining contact with them. None supports 
SECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 3]
C06697694 :IED U.S. DepartmentofState Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 0 5/29/2019 
3 
Zyuganov, and this reflects the overall mood in the country. 
Other groups are also not inclined. to support Zyuganov. 
The President: I would like to mention a couple of things we 
might focus on after the election. I don't want to let our 
partnership drift. I know you are tired, but there are a few 
points we need to focus on. Let Me mention three. H-E9-
START II: I hope we can bring START II into force as soon as 
possible. Boris and I have established a good track record in 
bringing down the nuclear threat. CTBT: we have worked well 
together on this. We need to keep at it and to maintain a 
positive attitude. Bosnia: _IFOR and our military partnership 
have been a great success. But we need to work hard to keep it 
from coming apart. Because of Russia's relationship with Serbia, 
we look to you to help prevent a failure. 4-E+ 
Last night we talked about the Middle East. Again, I would say 
that, because we are jointly sponsoring these talks, there is 
some basis for moving ahead. -ttl-
I have just a few other issues I want to mention. We will 
continue to back Russia in its dealings with the IMF and the 
World Bank. My advisers tell me you can get the most help from 
the World Bank on health issues, the social safety net, and land 
privatization. 4.E+ 
The other issue that I want to mention, which is linked to ' 
remarks that General Lebed made, concerns the agency which helps 
Jews emigrate to Israel, the Jewish Agency. Maybe you could 
discuss this with Vice President Gore, who is coming to Mdscow in 
several weeks. There is a lot of concern in our country about 
this.  
On the WTO, we want to help you and we will do what we can. But 
' I understand that you have more to do on the application. Let us 
know how we can be helpful. 4G-) 
After the election, I would like us to explore the NATO-Russia 
relationship. I would like to see what we can do to make this a 
positive for NATO and for Russia. -(-C-)-
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: I will try to be brief. I 
completely agree with you that the United States and Russia have 
accomplished a lot as far as global problems are concerned. It 
is still our intention to work toward ratification of START II 
and a complete ban on nuclear testing. We expect positive 
results with China after one more test. And we will continue to 
work with India and other threshold states. 4€-)-
SECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 4]
C 6 6 9 76 9 4 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 05/29/2019 
SEC11E^ 4 
On global, worldwide problems, we intend to focus on these even 
before the end of the year. We have already distussed Bosnia in 
a detailed fashion earlier today. Much will depend on what 
happens there. And much will depend on sanctions against Serbia. 
Sanctions cannot just be applied unilaterally against Serbia. 
Concerning Mladic, we know him and his people well. We have to 
be patient; these are difficult people to deal with. It's not a 
good idea to maintain a permanent military presence there.  
On the Middle East, I agree that we should give some time to the 
new Israeli leadership so that they have enough time to define 
their attitudes and positions. But they also need to implement 
the accords. So it will be some time before we can return to the 
negotiating track. We haveTO work with all countries, with all 
parties there. -4-(÷)-
Mr. President, I want to thank you for your support of our 
position with the IMF and the World Bank. We are maintaining 
good relations with Camdessus and Wolfensohn. We have made good 
progress and enjoy good relations with Mr. Summers. We plan to 
launch a program on social reform covering such areas as 
pensions, health, and education. It may be difficult, but we 
will press ahead. -tel-
As far as the Jewish Agency is concerned, I have been approached 
on this issue. We are not talking about banning it; their 
registration statute needs to be renewed. This won't be any 
problem; they just need to re-register. I don't think that 
General Lebed made any statement about Jews; it may be the only.
subject Lebed hasn't commented on. -K7H-
The President: He will have to learn what it means to be in the 
spotlight. It's the difference between third and first place. 
He will have to learn.  
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: It reminds me of a comment by 
Wellington to the British Prime Minister. Wellington said that, 
when he attended his first session of Parliament, he was very 
surprised to hear the members "discuss" his instructions. {-C-4-
The President: And he said if his Generals had behaved that way, 
they never would have defeated Napoleon. -14;4-
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: Thank you, Mr. President, for the 
support you have extended to us as we prepare for our election. 
The situation is difficult; we are not in a euphoric mood. Even 
after the election, the situation will be difficult. But we 
won't have to devote our attention to extraneous issues. We have 
not diverted our attention from inflation, spending. We have 
discussed this with Mr. Camdessus. It wasn't easy to meet all of 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 5]
C 0 6 6 97 6 94 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 05/29/2019 
5 
these targets, but then we did. We are acting in an untested 
environment. Perhaps you can convey this message to them (IMF): 
we intend to meet all of our targets for 1996. We are very 
satisfied with all our contacts with your side, with Mr. Summers, 
and with all of your colleagues. And from July 14-15, we plan to 
have sessions of our joint commission. We arequite satisfied 
with the work of the commission, which has managed to resolve 
many day-to-day issues. (S) 
The President: I agree with your comments regarding the IMF. 
They are entirely consistent with what Mr. Summers has said to 
me. I know how difficult it will be for you this year, and we 
will ask them to be understanding. -.H*-
The Gore-Chernomyrdin ComMission has been an etremely valuable 
mechanism for both of our countries. It has allowed us to pursue 
sensitive issues quietly, without embarrassment. It's good for 
dealing with issues that need to be resolved over time. We are 
all satisfied with it -- the Secretary of State, the Secretary of 
Treasury. It's somewhat unusual I know, but valuable. I know we 
have a'number of difficult issues on this agenda but I am 
confident we can work them out. Most of all, I want the Vice 
President to land.in Moscow in the warm glow of your victory. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: Thank you, Mr. President. I wish 
you every success and nothing but victory. We are keeping our 
fingers crossed. -14;4-
-- End of Conversation --
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06697694 Date: 05/29/2019