[Page 1]
CO 6 6 9 0 4 7 3 d RED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690473 Date: 06/16/2021 
Don: 
ppliV 
eYi 
Please deliver as soon as possible — before the French delegation goes to 
Lisbon — the following to Jean-David: 
Jean-David: 
[RELEASE IN FULL 
I gather from Tony and Peter that you had a good round of talks here in 
Washington. Sorry not to have seen you, but I echo Secretary Christopher's 
thanks for all that you're doing to steady out U.S.-French relations during a 
period when we have a lot of important work to do together. Also, Pamela has 
reported to the Secretary and me on her very useful working lunch with you 
today. I tried to phone you, but being unable to reach you, I'm passing you this 
message. 
I'm writing on the subject we saw each other about in Paris — NATO 
enlargement and NATO-Russia.. We're picking up reverberations from our 
Russian friends suggesting a) that they're still pressing for an unacceptable 
degree and form of linkage between the NATO-Russia relationship and 
enlargement, and b) that they're looking for ways ,to split the Alliance — and, 
more particularly, to exploit perceived differences tetween Washington and 
Paris. Based on your report to Tony about President Chirac's conversation with 
Chernomyrdin and some other signals we've picked up, it sounds as though 
Chernomyrdin may come to Lisbon looking for a public showdown over this 
whole complex of issues. We very much hope to avoid such an outcome. We 
want to see a succcessful Lisbon Summit that contributes to a strengthened 
OSCE. To put the same point in the negative, we do not want to see in Lisbon a 
repeat of the public display of -discord and recrimination that we saw at the 
Budapest OSCE Summit two years ago. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690473 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 Q 4 7 3 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690473 Date: 06/16/2021 
As you and I discussed in Paris, we regard an enhanced OSCE, like an 
enlarging NATO, to be an important part of the superstructure of the new 
European security order. Vice President Gore will use his bilateral with 
Chernomyrdin on Monday to make that point and to persuade Chernomyrdin of 
the U.S.'s determination to handle NATO enlargement in a way that meets 
legitimate Russian security concerns. At the same time, he will reject in the 
clearest, firmest terms any suggestion on the Russians part that enlargement be 
delayed or linked to completion of a NATO-Russia understanding. The VP will 
underscore our commitment to both the timetable and strategy that you and I 
discussed in Paris: a December NAC that sets the date for the NATO Summit no 
later than July '97; a Summit that invites the first new members to begin 
accession talks, and a strategy that features parallelism rather than linkage (i.e., 
we seek to\achieve progress on parallel tracks — adaptation, enlargement, 
NATO-Russia and arms control, especially CFE and START). 
A related point: the Russians are apparently bent on the goal of a legally 
binding outcome from Lisbon, rather than a.politic-ally 
know from your talk with Pamela, this would_create_macute_problernfOr us 
not least because the Russians would be tryineo'establish-thelirecedenffor=a-,----
legally binding NATO-Russia agreement. - 
Needless to say, the VP greatly looks fcirWard-to-his-theeting .With-your 
President as an opportunity to build on the gO-O-dVtifk-thiry-oirdidlir 
Washington. 
Best regards, 
Strobe 
2 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690473 Date: 06/16/2021