[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 86  9 8 0:1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686980 Date: 02/09/2021 
The Friendship Force 
Festival of the Midnight Sun 
RELEASE IN FULL 
St. Petersburg, Russia; June 16-27, 1993 
Peter The Great built a beautiful city on the Gulf of Finland—a city designed to provide 
Russia a gateway to the West. Now, after seven decades under communist rule as 
Leningrad, this great city is rediscovering its original purpose. We've been invited to come 
to St. Petersburg this summer—to enjoy their annual celebration of the Midnight Sun and to 
work with our Russian host families in building bridges of understanding and cooperalion. 
* Midnight Sun Itinerary * 
Wednesday, June 16: Depart 
for Helsinki via Finnair from 
New York, or by SAS from 
Seattle or Los Angeles. Fly 
overnight arriving the next day. 
Thursday, June 17: Met on 
arrival in Helsinki by chartered 
coach for a city tour of this 
Baltic capital. Lunch on your 
own, followed by check-in at 
the Hotel Presidentti. Afternoon
Saturday, June 19-Thursday, 
June 24: Share everday 
experiences with your host 
family, learning about Russian 
life from the inside. Through 
your family and the many 
friends you'll make, gain 
insights into the problems and 
opportunities facing Russia. 
Group k activities during the wee 
will tl incude a city tour, visits o 
Friday, June 25: The final day 
with your host family. In the 
evening bid farewell as you 
board the overnight train (with 
sleeping accommodations) to 
Tallinn, the capital of Estonia. 
Saturday, June 26: Arrive 
Tallinn in the morning. There 
will be a city tour by coach with 
the remainder of the day free. 
Stay overnight at the Hotel V1111 
for rest or for exploring the Hermitage ushkin, an and P or Hotel Olympia. Lunch and 
Helsinki. Evening welcome 
reception at the hotel for all of 
evening cultural performance, 
and a welcome party. dinner will be included. 
the Midnight Sun participants. Throughout the week join in the 
many festivities that characterize 
Sunday, June 27: After breakfast, 
depart Tallinn by the ferry 
Friday, June 18: Following St. Petersburg's famous mid- "Corbiere" for the four hour 
breakfast., board a deluxe motor summer festival. They call it journey across the Gulf of 
coach as part of our Midnight White Nights. We're calling it Finland to Helsinki where you 
Sun caravan to St. Petersburg. It our Festival of the Midnight Sun. will be taken directly to the 
is an eight hour ride through the During the homestay, you'll also airport for the flight home. The 
Fimiish and Russian countryside, 
with a lunch stop at the border. 
have the opportunity to participate 
in an optional "special interest 
flight on Finnair to New York is 
nonstop, arriving the same day. 
Sit back and enjoy the scenery! day" focusing on your choice of Those traveling to Seattle or Los 
When you arrive in law and business, art, health Angeles on SAS will have an 
St. Petersburg, your host 
family will be waiting. They'll 
care, education, or religion and 
social issues. 
overnight stay in Copenhagen, 
arriving home the next day. (For 
take you home with them for the optional returns, see itineraries 
unique, week-long homestay. on reverse side.) 
Festival Fee: $1,850 from New York; $1,995 from Los Angeles or Seattle 
The Festival Fee includes roundtrip airfare from your 
gateway city to Helsinki; hotel, city tour, welcome reception 
and breakfast in Helsinki; bus caravan to St. Petersburg; 
one-week homestay with all lodging, meals, tours and 
festival activities in St. Petersburg; sleeper train to Tallinn; 
city tour, hotel and three meals in Tallinn; ferry from 
Tallinn to Helsinki and transfer to airport. The Penland-
Brown Travel Agency in Atlanta, Georgia can provide 
assistance in obtaining connecting flights between your 
hometown and the departure gateway with the lowest 
available fares. Ca11 Lorie at 1-800-486-4949. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686980 Date: 02/09/2021