[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL 
THE UNITED STATES, THE NEW 
WORLD ORDER, AND NATO: 
A DIRECTION FOR THE FUTURE 
git9 
\‘41ERNAZi o  ogi4 
koc§' 11 4 0, 
T wct-
tif a 
JIM t)i Ilk NI co) 
%X. AII7 '`Ne‘
° Ris pROG
/9 93-9 N
December 15, 1993 
Harvard University 
Cambridge, MA 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 90 2 8 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
CONTENTS 
Opening Address 2 
Captain Donald P. Loren, US 
NATO's New Direction: 4 
Can You Get There from Here? 
Commander Kurt W. Tidd,. US Noy 
NATO in the New World Order 
Kori Schake 
Comparing the Roles of NATO, NACC, and the CSCE 
Celeste A. Wallander 
Keynote Address 
Thomas G. Weston 
NATO and the United Nations 
Alan K. Henrikson 
The Alliance and Post Cold War: 
US Interest in Europe 
Robert L. Pfaltzgraff, Jr. 
The Implications of Russia's Response to 
East European Hopes of Inclusion in NATO 
Uri Ra'anan 
8 
14 
33 
40 
52 
63 
NATO: A SACEUR Perspective 70 
Col. Richard H. Witherspoon, US Army 
Closing Remarks 74 
Robert D. Puinam 
Contributors 76 
List of Participants 79 
About the Fellows Program 83 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 3]
C O 6 6 9 O 2 8 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
NATO AND THE UNITED NATIONS: 
TOWARD A NON-ALLERGIC RELATIONSHIP 
Professor Alan K. Henrikson 
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy 
Tufts University 
The United Nations traditionally has been allergic to NATO. I use this unusual word—from the Greek 
+ ergon, or "other" and "work"—because it suggests exactly that odd reaction, a disagreeable 
sensitivity to or even actual antipathy toward another, different kind of body, that has characterized so 
much of the United Nations community's response over the years to the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO). 
Perhaps revealingly, there is not a single reference to the North Atlantic Alliance or NATO in the most 
recent annual Report to the membership of the United Nations by the Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-
Ghali." This gold-covered document, of some 182 pages (the longest ever), does actually mention the 
Organization of American States (OAS), the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Conference on 
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), and even the Economic Community of West African States 
(ECOWAS). But the name of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization does not appear in the volume. 
In fairness, of course, it should be noted that Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali, both in this large 
document of September 1993 and in his Agenda for Peace report of 1992 to the UN Security Council, 
has in a general way supported a larger role even in the peace and- security field for "regional 
understandings." A brief Chapter VII in that slim blue booklet deals with "Cooperation with regional 
arrangements and organizations." But that earlier, shorter report does not mention NATO either.' 
The comment made late in 1992 by NATO Secretary-General Manfred WOtner InipliCitliipiaks volumes 
about the difficult NATO-UN relationship. "Mr. Boutros-Ghali, in for Peace' and letter to 
the CSCE, has welcomed the role of regional organizations in upholding UN decisions," as the Secretary-
General wrote in the NATO Review. "At the same time, the habit of cooperation and looking to each 
ALAN K. HENRIKSON is Director of The Fletcher Roundtable on a New World Order at The Fletcher School of 
Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts 02155. Hi is also an Associate at The Center for 
International Affairs, Harvard University, where he has served as Counselor on-CiriadiairAffairs. 
"Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Report on the Work of the Organization from the Forty-seventh to the Forty-eightt 
Session of the General Assembly, September 1993 (New York: United Nations, 1993). 
"Boutros Boutros-Ghali, An Agenda for Peace: Preventive Diplomacy, Peacemaking and Peace-keeping, Report 
of the Secretary-General pursuant to the statement adopted by the Summit Meeting of the Security Council on 31 
January 1992 (New York: United Nations, 1992). This report does mention, with regard to Africa, the OAU, the 
League of Arab States (LAS), and the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC). With reference to Asia it 
mentions the Association of Smith-east Asian Nations (ASEAN). Regarding Central America, it refers to the OAS and 
a further unique arrangement, "The Friends of the Secretary-General." The reference to Europe is noteworthy: 
"Efforts undertaken by the European Community and its member States, with the support of States participating in the 
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, have been of central importance in dealing with the crisis in the 
Balkans and neighbouring areas" (p. 36). 
40 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
NATO AND ME UNITED NAHONS 
other for guidance has yet to be established at the working level.' Indeed, such actual practice of 
inter-organizational collaboration had by then scarcely begun. 
The omission of the name of NATO from major UN institutional reports, like NATO's coolness toward 
the United Nations, contrasts strikingly with what I believe to be the actual reality: that the North 
Atlantic Alliance, the legal commitment along with the military forces and political infrastructure, 
constitutes the firmest foundation the United Nations system has in the world. Arguably, NATO has done 
more in its 44-year history to contribute to world order, and not merely stability in its own defensive or 
treaty area, than has the United Nations Organization itself, operating worldwide. NATO has been the 
bedrock of international peace, even globally. This, I might point out, was part of the original intention. 
When President Harry Truman attended the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty in Washington, D.C., 
on April 4, 1949, he stated: "To protect this area against war will be a long step toward permanent peace 
in the whole world."" I draw attention, for later reference, to the fact that President Truman said 
the treaty would protect the North Atlantic area against "war"—a systemic goal—rather than against any 
particular country such as Germany or Soviet Russia—an alliance objective. 
Why, if the world's dependence on NATO has been so heavy, has there been such an aversion to that 
body on behalf of the United Nations community and among multilateralists? The basic reason 
presumably is that the North Atlantic Treaty, though it purports to be UN Charter-consistent, often has 
been considered by theoretically (not historically) minded internationalists to be fundamentally at odds 
with the very concept of the United Nations. The opposition between NATO and the United Nations, to 
put it too succinctly, is between collective self-defense,- or alliance, and collective' security, or-
system, 
Article 51 of the UN Charter, on which NATO hangs its hat, is considered by some to be a throwback 
to the old, prewar, unenlightened international order, COnteived -as-a state of -atat-chÿ: "Nothing in the 
present Charter," this article begins, "shall impair the -inherent-tight of individual or- collective self-
defence if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United Nations . . .." In other words, the 
right of self-defense is thought to be pre-existing, primordial, fiindamentaLand not- as anything; that—
derives from the new world order of the Charter itself--that is, the notion of collective security. 
These two basic ideas, collective self-defense and collective security, are classically and well contrasted 
by the political theorists Arnold Wolfers and Inis Claude. TheYdierefore need not be elaborated upon 
here. The basic difference is that Professor Wolters; who-was skeptical of the idea of ciilleCtive SeCurity, 
imagined that it might lead to an obligation to take punitive action against one's own allies, if the United 
Nations should so decide. "Soon after the Korean War had rekindled the lioPe that ctilliCtie šecurity 
under the United Nations would of necessity be directed against nondemocratic countries belonging to 
the Soviet bloc—the same countries, therefore, against which all Western collective defense arrangements 
"Manfred Wörner, "A Vigorous Alliance—a Motor for Peaceful Change in Europe," NATO Review, vol. 40, no. 
6 (December 1992), p. 4. 
"Address of the President of the United States, Department of State Bulletin, vol. 20, no. 511 (April 17, 1949), 
pp. 481-82, quoted in Alan K. Henrikson, "The Creation of the North Atlantic Alliance," in John F. Reichart and 
Steven R. Sturm, eds., American Defense Policy (5th ed.; Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982), 
pp. 296-322, quotation on p. 297. 
41 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 5]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
Alan K. Henrikson 
were directed—the Suez crisis brought a rude awakening,-" as Wolfers wrote." The somewhat more 
idealistic, or less realistic, Professor Claude is inclined to credit the wisdom of collective security. But 
• he, too, was emphatic that NATO is not an embodiment of the collective security concept.' 
The best expression of the essential difference between these two ideas is, I believe, that of President 
Woodrow Wilson. He said in January 1917: "There must be, not a balance of power, but a community 
of power; not organized rivalries, but an organized common peace."41 A comprehensively organized 
international security arrangement, paradoxically, could actually disentangle countries from dangerous 
military alliances and alignments, Wilson was convinced. What is not perhaps sufficiently noted is the 
importance of disarmament in the Wilsonian model of world order. His chief insight was that international 
relations should and would eventually approximate domestic civil society, with fortified barriers between 
nations broken down and national arsenals considerably reduced—to the level of police forces. As Wilson 
stipulated in the fourth of his Fourteen Points, adequate guarantees should be "given and taken that 
national armaments will be reduced to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety." In our own 
time, in the 1990s, that would imply a critical link between the success of collective security and weapons 
nonproliferation, as well as nuclear management. Without serious arms reduction and control, collective 
security cannot really be expected to work. It is unfair to Wilson's memory to think that it could. 
Even more directly relevant to the issue before us--the NATO-UN relationship—is an early theoretical 
argument that at one time raged, as between the jurists Sir Eric Beckett and Hans Kelsen, over whether 
NATO is truly a "regional" organization or not. If it is, then its actions might come under the control 
of the UN Security Council, for Chapter VIII of the Charter expressly gives that body authority,over 
"regional arrangements or agencies." Article 53, paragraph 1, states: "The Security Council 
shall, where appropriate, utilize such regional arrangements or agencies for enforcement action under its 
authority." Sir Eric Beckett took the view that NATO, as a collective defense organization, cannot be 
a regional arrangement in the sense of the Charter. Hans Kelsen -replied that matters relating to the 
maintenance of peace and security appropriate for regional action_must not and do ript_ exclude se1f= . 
defense. His interpretation would seem to indicate that NATO could b.e1)oth a.,cpllectiv_e7security,entity—_-
and collective-defense body!:The Beckett-Kelsen debate, whichever sideone prefers,--tends to place form. 
before fimction. What is vitally important, in my view, is not so much what organizations like NATO - 
are as what they do, and can do, over time. 
. _ 
- - : 
"Arnold Wolfers, Discord and Collaboration: Essays on Internatinnal Pizilitics (Baltimore: The kdini" Hopkins--  - — 
Press, 1962), chapter 12, "Collective Defense Versus Collective Security," quotation on p. 186. 
'This L. Claude, Jr., Power and International Relations (New .YOrk: Random House, 1962), pp: 120-21. For a 
brief application of this distinction to some recent events, see, e.g., Alan K. Henrikson, "Collective Security, the 
Balance of Power, and American Leadership,' in Mappinz the Unknown: Towards a New World Order, The 
Yearbook of the Swedish Institute of International Affairs, 1992-1993, ed. Lidija Babic and Bo Huldt (London: Hurst 
and Company, 1993), pp. 77-87. _ . 
'Quoted in Alan K. Henrikson, "Tbe North Atlantic Alliance as a Form of World. Order," in Nezotiatinz World 
Order: Th e Artisanship and Architecture of Global Diplomacy, ed. Alan K. Henrikson (Wilmington, Delaware: 
Scholarly Resources Inc., 1986), p. 112. 
'A somewhat more extended summary is given in R. A. Akindele, The Orzanization and Promotion of World 
Peace: A Study of Universal-Rezional Relationships (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1976), pp. 11-13. 
42 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 6]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
NATO AND 771E UNI7F.D NATIONS 
The origins of NATO, in this context, are important to know. The U.S. negotiators of the North Atlantic 
Treaty in 1948 and 1949—principally, John Hickerson and Theodore Achilles of the State Department—
introduced to the ongoing European discussions a new formula from the 1947 Inter-American Treaty, or 
Rio de Janeiro Pact. The text of the Rio Treaty was so drafted as to include the possibility of action 
against aggression from within the alliance itself, as well as from an extrahemispheric source. The 
historical example on every Latin American mind was the chronic Chaco War between Paraguay and 
Bolivia (1932-1935). In 1947, when the Inter-American Treaty was signed, the possibility of aggression 
from outside the Western Hemisphere seemed quite remote. The twenty-one American republic partners 
thus stated inclusively, without specifying the direction from which aggression might come, that "an 
armed attack against one or more of them . . . shall be considered an attack against them all." This very 
familiar-sounding language is Article 5—the heart—of the North Atlantic Treaty! As Hickerson pointed 
out at the time: "Conceived in these terms it would be possible for the Soviet Union to join the 
arrangement without detracting from the protection which it would give to its other members."' That 
theoretical possibility deserves to be remembered. 
NATO is and has always been, I believe, both an alliance and a system, intraregional but also 
extraregional. It is a "hybrid creature," as one of my students recently remarked. It also has a 
"changeling" quality. It is not at all static--as the examination of institutions in terms of such categories 
as "collective self-defense" and "collective security" can mislead one .into thinking. An organization, 
conceived as a historically evolving entity, can turn from one thing into another, and may even seem to 
replace itself. Consider, for example, how the Quadruple Alliance against Napoleonic France turned into 
the larger, ostensibly impartial Quintuple Alliance,_which in turn eventually became the basis of the 
systemic Concert of Europe. Consider, similarly, how the Triple Entente plus the United States of 
America, then an "associated" power, became at the end of the First World -Arm the Big Four, and 
(though without the United States) the League of Nations Council, the nucleus of the League system. 
Consider, further, how Churchill's "Grand Alliance," or Roosevelt! s "United Nations," of the Second 
World War became the United Nations Organization,,withthe Security Council of war victors as its inner 
directorate." 
NATO is quite similar—a Cold War alliance that has, latently within, it, the pOssibility of becoming a 
wider systemic entity. Think, in retrospect, how the very existence of the North Atlantic Alliance worked 
to reconcile France and Germany, to control Greece and Turkey, and to chasten Great Britain and Iceland 
when they came to blows in their "Cod War." I would even contend, much more broadly, that the 
relationship today between Europe, as a whole, and the United States of America is being profoundly and 
subtly "managed" by the structure of the continuing, but evolving North Atlantic Alliance relationship. 
To make the point again, to put complex organizations such as NATO into strict analytical categories 
"essentializes" them., depriving them and their operators of flexibility and a capicity for 
fundamental change'. 
Having sought to establish the reality that NATO is both an alliance and system-like, I offer for 
consideration the following proposition: lf NATO is_to maintain its inherently systemic as well as its 
alliance characteristics in current circumstances, it must expand to the east progressively and rapidly, 
"The reference is given in Henrikson, "The Creation of the North Atlantic Alliance," p. 300. 
"Henrikson, "NATO as a Form of World Order," pp. 111-12. 
43 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 7]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
Alan K. Henrikson 
including at least the largest countries of the former "Eastern Europe." With the dismantling of the 
Berlin War, the boundaries of Europe, always the focus of NATO, have suddenly shifted. Hungary, the 
Czech Republic, and Poland are, so to speak, "where" the Federal Republic of Germany was in 1954-
1955, when it was brought into NATO. These countries are important; they have asked to join. And if 
they are not included, there could be trouble—trouble that could be prevented. The further issue of 
possibly including Russia as Boris Yeltsin and, in the mid-1950s, Georgi Malenkov, also asked for, 
is much more problematical." Russia usually has been on the margins of the European state system, half 
in or half out. Russians may not, in fact, unequivocally desire such a close, integrated security 
relationship with the West. The idea that Zbigniew Brzezinski has of "a far-reaching NATO proposal for 
a formal treaty of alliance with Russia and a simultaneous initiative to establish a NATO-linked 'coalition 
for regional security' with three or four Central European states qualifying for eventual NATO 
membership" reflects his background in and understanding of the region.' 
The very viability of NATO today, I submit, depends on its preserving its systemic character. This 
could be at stake if the alliance/system does not expand. The eastern part of Europe is now an a-systemic 
void, a danger to itself and others. NATO is an international security organization. It makes no sense, 
as someone recently said, for it to admit only those countries that are already secure. Its very mission 
is to "project stability," as Secretary-General Wörner untiringly has stated. 
If NATO is now to.extend a securing influence outside its own existing alliance area, as defined in Article 
6 of the North Atlantic Treaty, it must do either of two things: take aboard new members or seek 
authorization for its action from elsewhere—that is, from the United Nations -orthe CSCE. The failure 
of NATO to react and to transform itself even more rapidlit than it hi done-, starting in 1989 as the COW 
War clearly was coming to a quick end, has meant that it now has to seek a "mandate" outside itself, or 
above itself. This partial loss of opportunity is unfortunate. 
During the Cold War years, when the "Free World" determinedly tashe fret World;lheleaders Of the 
North Atlantic Alliance had a strong conception of international order of their own—a "NATO ideology." 
The Preamble of the Treaty, which speaks of "freedom," "comrnon heritage," and "civilization," was 
taken quite seriously. As one Cold Warrior, the veteran PaulNitie; wrote at the - "It is my - 
suggestion that a concept of world order is necessary both to hold the alliaace sistein tOgetherand .as a 
basis for harmonizing the relations between the alliance syStem is the 'doilifid-ifof free riations.'"' The _ _ sameexpansivelogic applies today. 
"Malenkov's request in 1954 was aimed at defeating the European Defense Community (EDC)—hence, German 
rearmament. Though intriguing, his overture was essentially a propaganda ploy, and was treated as such by the 
American and other Western governments. 
'4Zbigniew Brzezinski, "A Bigger—and Safer—Europe," The NeW .York  DeCeMber t,..1993.-Brzezinskrs.
idea of a formal treaty with Russia (presumably a NATO treaty with Russia).in present circumstances is reniiniscent 
ofsomeof the purpose of the 1887 German-Russian "Reinsurance Treaty." 
"Paul H. Nitze, "Coalition Policy and the Concept of World Order," in Alliance Policy in the Cold War, ed. 
Arnold Wolfers (Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1976; originally published in 1959 by John Hopkins 
Press, Baltimore), pp. 15-30, quotation on pp. 26-27; quoted in Henrilcson, "The North Atlantic Alliance as aform 
of World Order," pp. 121-22. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 8]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
NATO AND THE UNITED NA77ONS 
What has happened, in effect, is that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, in_now turning to the United 
Nations or theCSCE for its moral charge, has become somewhat ideologically decapitated. More gently 
stated, it has lost its halo, its idealism—as important as its military mission. The current NATO doctrine 
of "interlocking institutions," according to which NATO, the UN, the CSCE, the WEU, and the EU each 
has "a distinct role within a framework of complementary, mutually reinforcing organizations with 
responsibilities in the field of international peace and security" might turn out to be debilitating rather 
than innervating, synergistic." This is likely to prove the case especially if the idea of "layering"—the 
United Nations necessarily always on top, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe just 
beneath it, and NATO somewhere further below them as a "subcontractor"—ever takes hold. Manfred 
Wörner, for one, has emphatically rejected the notion of NATO as filling merely a "subcontracting" role. 
He is right to do so. The North Atlantic Alliance must be able to propose its own contracts. 
This critique of the "interlocking" or "layering" idea might seem to imply that all international 
organizations are on the same level. In theoretical terms, a case can be made for this view. In the 
Westphalian international system that we still live in, all states are sovereign, and remain sovereign even 
when they pool a bit of their sovereignty, as members of the European Union have done. After all, 
virtually the same powerful states are involved whether they choose to act through the United Nations, 
European Union, NATO, or other organization. I once heard a former SACEUR, General John 
Galvin , reflecting on NATO's de facto involvement in the Persian Gulf operation (Desert Shield and 
Desert Storm), refer to NATO and the United Nations.asilellow" organizations. This is quite apt. There _ 
is much to be said for such a nonhierarchical and, also, informal idea of the NATO-United Nations 
relationship or, perhaps more accurately, non-relationship..
The United Nations and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe naturally look to their 
own members or signatories, some of whom happen to be _parties to_ the NATO alliance, rather than - 
to NATO itself for assistance with the making and implementation of decisions and policies. It is not that 
they don't notice the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,(and thus mention-it in their reports).but, rather, 
that they ignore it. NATO itself, admittedly—especially- as -the release -of Cold War-tensions _las_ _ 
reduced political coherence within the Alliance—has,tendeCto favoCselective_ally_participation" in. . 
important tasks. One of the risks of this new practice of discontinuing emphasis on NATO as a solidary 
thing is that the United Nations Organization and even the.CSCE,will attempt develop their own separate - 
capacities, when they can ill afford to. To an extent, some of this expenditure is desirable, for any 
successful organization must be functionally competent. But, at a time when material resources and moral 
resources are in such short supply, it makes no sense at all to ignore what NATO can do, and maybe do 
best. 
What might be done about this awkward double institutional aversion, this mutual allergy? An important 
key, I suggest, is Article 43 of the United Nations Charter. This relatively unknown passage provides for _ 
the conclusion of "special agreements" between UN members or groups of members7North Atlantic 
Alliance members or even NATO itself?—and the SecurityCouncil. This is a possible bridge between 
the world, its regions, and their nations. The article reads, in its entirety: 
'Interlocking Institutions': The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE),' Dasic Fact Sheet 
No. 6 (Brussels: NATO Office of Information and Press, September 1993). 
45 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 9]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
Alan K. Henrikron 
Article 43 
1. All Members of the United Nations, in order to contribute to the maintenance of international 
peace and security, undertake to make available to the Security Council, on its call and in accordance 
with a special agreement or agreements, armed forces, assistance, and facilities, including rights of 
passage, necessary for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security. 
2. Such agreement or agreements shall govern the numbers and types of forces, their degree of 
readiness and general location, and the nature of the facilities and assistance to be provided. 
3. The agreement or agreements shall be negotiated as soon as possible on the initiative of the 
Security Council. They shall be concluded between the Security Council and Members or between the 
Security Council and groups of Members and shall be subject to ratification by the signatory states in 
accordance with their respective constitutional processes. 
No Article 43 special agreernent ever was concluded, owing largely to the Cold War. Today, however, 
the negotiation of these connective links should be possible. As Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali 
himself commented in Agenda for Peace: "Under the political circumstances that now exist for the first 
time since the Charter was adopted, the long-standing obstacles to the conclusion of such special 
agreements should noionger prevail."" I believe he is absolutely correct in this assessments°
Who, then, should enter into these agreements? The logical "first" individual UN member state that 
should do so might be Canada,,a country that has long dcine internaticinal military- duty under various 
guises under UN auspices and has just withdrawn its forces from NATO's military structure.5' Beyond 
these singular arrangements; which are somewhat analogous to NATO status of forces agreements 
(SOFAs), there should be an overarching "framework" agreementrwith guidelines laid out for all North 
Atlantic Treaty signatories (even those not part of the integrated 'military structure); between NATO as 
an organization and the UN Security Council. I,of courS-6,1-dO recogriiii-the-Probable Objection - - 
that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is not a legal-peršditility-(in suppoied contrast tb the  . 
European Union, which has majority voting) and cannot Illerefofe Sign-treatieS—ór makeCoiriparable _ _ binding legal commitments. „
What I arn suggesting, however, need no't necessarily be in "treaty" forrn, although the language of 
Article 43 noting that special agreements would be "subject to ratification" would seem to require use of 
a treaty-related process. Should this "constitutional" obstaae to a E-Ornrriittheit by NATO as such prove 
insuperable, a NATO negotiation with the Security Council could erect instead a kind of scaffolding for 
"Boutros-Chali, An Agenda for Peace p. 25. 
"The subject is discussed more comprehensively in Alan K. Henrikson, Definine a New World Order: Toward a 
Practical Vision of Collective Action for International Peace and SeCiirity (Medford, Massachusetts: The Fletcher 
School of Law and Diplomacy, 1991). 
'This recommendation, to a Canadian audience, was developed in somewhat more detail in Alan K. Henrikson, 
"The Canadian Contribution: -From Word to Concept to Model,"textof presentation ici,the concluding session of the 
65th Foreign Policy Conference of the Canadian Institute of International Affairs (CIIA), "Does History Repeat 
Itself?' Ottawa, December 4-5, 1993. 
46 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 10]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
NATO AND THE UNITED NATIONS 
more binding bilateral agreements between individual NATO members and the Council. The result would 
be much the same. Function, in life, usually takes precedence over form. 
What this mutual approach might mean, in operational-terms; -was articulated in -a historically -learned - 
and also far-sighted way by Thomas R. Pickering, when he was serving during the Gulf War period as 
U.S. Permanent Representative at the United Nations. Speaking personally, Ambassador Pickering made 
the following "relevant points" regarding Article 43. These merit recounting today, two years later. They 
are: 
First, the conclusion of such an agreement need not confer an automatic, mandatory 
obligation to provide troops to the Security Council, but could instead simply state their 
availability subject to certain terms or procedures. 
Second, Article 43 is silent on command arrangements: the phrase "on its call" does not 
necessarily mean "at its direction." 
Third, by specifying "assistance and facilities" the language permits mernbers to satisfy 
their obligations by means other than provision of combat troops—a useful flexibility. 
Fourth, Paragraph 3 specifies that agreements shall be at the initiative of the Security 
Council, a helpful limiting factor that ensures selectivity. 
Finally, Paragraph 3 also states that agreements may be between the Council and 
individual members or groups of members, offering a potential basis for associations 
between the Security Council and regionally based alliances. Since alliances offer a more 
functional basis for concerted military action than a chance-grouping of. U.N. member_ 
states, this too could be a useful feature.' 
Indeed it could. Such a conception of a possible "alliee relationship_betweep the United Nations and. the. 
"regionally based" North Atlantic Treaty Organization-suggestanother—. — -long step;" -like-the- one.of - 
which President Truman spoke in 1949 when the North Atlantic Treaty was signed. Many other, variant 
conceptions of global-regional cooperation might today be considered." But this one employing Article 
43, aimed as forming a cooperative bond between,the world'-s‘central, international collective:segurity, 
organization and its most powerful collective self-defensearrangementi really mightamount to something, 
NATO and the United Nations, though not exactly.Siameseitwins,Ldepend- on :each -other. As _Manfred -,:.-
Wörner recently has said, 
'Thomas R. Pickering, "The UN Contribution to Future International Security," personal remarks at Conference 
on Naval Expeditionary Forces and Power Projection, "Into the-,21st Century,'!-sponsored-by The Fletcher School of 
Law and Diplomacy and the United States Marine Corps University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, November 20-21, 
1991. 
53See, for example, the imaginative yet perhaps practicable ideas in Colonel J. D. Harries, "Peacekeeping 
Futures," Canadian Defence Ouarterly, vol. 21, no. 2 (October 1991), pp. 25-31, and Gwyn Prins, "The United 
Nations and Peace-Keeping in the Post-Cold-War World: The Case of Naval Power," Bulletin of Peace Proposals, 
voi. 22, no. 2 (1991), pp. 135-55. 
47 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 11]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
Alan K. Henrikson 
It is because of NATO's capabilities, particularly in the field of crisis management, that 
the United Nations has increasingly looked to the Alliance as a partner in peacekeeping 
in recent years. The UN is fiilfilling an extremely important and indispensable role, but 
it is overburdened and underfunded, today handling-no less than1-7 missions worldwide 
with over 80,000 troops at a price tag of over $3.6 billion. Under the able leadership of 
Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali, who enjoys my admiration, the UN has set the stage 
for the development of an emerging international consensus toward a broader notion of 
security that includes the concept of intervention for humanitarian purposes. 
But even the most extraordinary dedication cannot solve the basic problem that the UN lacks the 
infrastructure, the logistics, and the command and control facilities for major military operations. Only 
NATO can offer these assets, at least in the European theatre. For NATO, in turn, cooperation with the 
UN facilitates the Alliance's new role in crisis management; it places our efforts in a broad, 
internationally accepted context. Moreover, it also increases public awareness and acceptance of crisis 
management. So the future may well see frequent and close cooperation between the UN and NATO.' 
This cannot happen, however, without political will—such as President Truman manifested in the 1940s. 
The 1990s are another time of possible international "creation." This is also a postwar decade. In it, as 
I have attempted to show, old political bodies, even seemingly antagonistic ones, can be "de-sensitized," 
and made to cohabit in the house of a new world order. 
DISCUSSION WITH ALAN K. HENRIKSON 
SCHAKE: What did we do when the Soviets asked for NATO membership? 
HENRIKSON: Well, one idea was put forward by Zbigniew Brzezinski;.you.probably all, saw it. 
SCHAKE: In 1954? 
HENRIKSON: No, very recently in the Times, and his answer-to that question isi_ancLit bears on4ily, 
legal-theoretical point: his answer is an alliance between :IsIAT.0: and the --Russian: federation-An --
conjunction with what he calls a coalition of Central European:statesand a kind of expanded Partnership 
for Peace. I think he is trying to differentiate his idea of a coalition:with afocus on Poland and Hungary 
and Czechoslovakia where he and his family are from—Whp,he_writes_ about .that_ subject„ Eastern: _ - 
Europe, he really knows it. He has that sensitivity I think that many of us born in the USA just do not 
have. But he proposes this coalition of central European states, anexpanded Partnership:for Peace which- - 
would go even beyond that, plus this alliance, not between the US and the Russian federation—it would 
not be another Yalta, it would not be a condominium arrangement—but between NATO, between 
Luxembourg and Iceland, and the Russian federation and everything that is part of it. It occurred to me 
that it is something like the 1887 Reinsurance treaty that replaced the Dreikaiserbund. And therefore that 
can be done in conjunction with the enlargement of NATO to the-east._ 
514.4anfred Wörner, "A New NATO for a New Era," speech by the Secretary-General of NATO at the 
National Press Club, Washington, D.C., October 6, 1993. 
48 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 12]
CO 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 =1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
NATO AND 7HE UNI7ED NATIONS 
SCHAKE: O.K. What would this relationship between NATO and-Russia-encompass? What would it 
do? It is clear what our relationship with Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic would be. They 
would be members of NATO. What would that relationship that you are suggesting between Russia and 
NATO entail? 
HENRIKSON: Essentially it would be a classic nonaggression pact. Whatever political and psychological 
overtones that would have. It would have implications, just as the Reinsurance treaty did. That had secret 
clauses that provided for the status quo in the Balkans and essentially it reserved for Russia the right to 
intervene. And I think that would be an implication of such an arrangement. It would indirectly and not 
explicitly give Moscow an assurance that the US and NATO would not interfere with what the Russians 
might feel they have to do in Tadjikistan, or Kazhakstan, or someplace else. Remember there are also 
parts of the CSCE which bind them to a certain set of principles, and that has not been a weak reed on 
which to lean politically, and also there is the NACCrelationship, so there are various ways which a 
commitment like this could be prevented from degenerating into an insurance of Russia's reexpanded 
sphere of influence. It is Brzezinski's idea, not mine, and I am really trying to think it out. 
SCHAKE: No, I understand. I think though that that does in fact sound like another Yalta except with 
a different boundary, namely, Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic are on this side, but we te11 them 
that we are not going to bother with Tadjikistan and other places, so the effect is the same but the area 
is different. It is not clear that NATO would not want to manage Russia-calmly and respectfully the way 
the Germans did the withdrawal of Russian forces from German territory in a.way that makes them more 
of a partner than that, namely, that keeps them front trarnpling Tidjikištan and Georgiaandstuff like that, 
by empowering them in Europe—in a sense treating them as partners in a European context. 
HENRIKSON: It could not and would notlell"them that. As I emphasized, there is the Helsinki Final 
Act and so on, and the UN Charter for that matter*hich-preclude their doing-things like-intervening in 
sovereign states elsewhere. One would have to do these things simultaneously. Russia is both in and out 
of the European state system. There are times when the Russians do not want to be included. I think 
Brzezinski's idea fits the logic of the situation quite well. If only he did not try so hard to differentiate 
what he has proposed from what I think the adminiittatiorriseVokring 'toward. The adniinistratfon is a - 
-little vague right now because,as was pointed out,you-Want-to-keep the --consensus togetheruntil-lailua*; - 
but that is no reason why an academic cannot be a-little-bolder-in circumstances like this: - -- - 
SCHAKE: But the vagaries of it. . . . 
HENRIKSON: Why not be Harry Truman. I mean think of the uncertainties; think-of-the sensitivities, 
including Russian sensitivities. When the North Atlantic Treaty was revealed in late 1948,--actually Stalin 
knew about it already because of Donald Maclean who - was First Secretary at the British Embassy, so 
he was not too surprised. There was a great cry of outrage from the east, and there were other-countrieS 
clamoring to get in. Yugoslavia wanted to join. And the idea of associate membership was actually 
considered at that time, and rejected. As Robert Lovett said, that would mean as in a country club- you 
have members, you would have non-resident members, and you would have those that had summer 
privileges. I think that is essentially what we are talking about in some of these more or lesser charmed 
circles. 
49 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 13]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8:1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
Alan K. Henrikson 
SCHAKE: The difference the administration is facing now is that in 1948, you had the Berlin blockade. 
It was clear the Soviets were the bad guys by then, whereas now I think the administration is buying time 
because it is not clear the Russians are going to be bad guys. We want to give them every incentive not 
to be a negative force in Europe. 
HENRIKSON: Yes, it is very important to be attentive to chronology. Things happen ki fast. Ernest 
Bevin had the idea for what became NATO at the foreign ministers' meeting in December 1947. It was 
not until February and March 1948 that it was clear the Russians were the bad guys. The basic idea for 
NATO was actually that of Bevin who put it to Marshall, who was actually not very interested in it for 
a while, until some of these events did create public opinion and Congressional support such that an 
agreement like this could be negotiated. But statesmanship can, knowing what its objectives are and its 
interests are, exploit events provided that you know what you want to do. And it is not clear, to me 
as one US citizen,that those who are proposing the Partnership for Peace, including you and some of our 
other colleagues here today, really know what objective you have in mind. And I think that ought 
to be made clear. And I think it ought to include membership of Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Poland 
in NATO, and that this should be expedited and done very, very directly with provisional periods for 
those who might engage in a Partnership for Peace to see whether they are up to it, to engender a certain 
habit of cooperation, common standards, and so on. But if just one group of countries is included, think 
what that would mean to the countries all around. Basically, what happened when the Rome.declaration_ 
which created NACC came out, I remember a British journalist saying—I happeifico be in England.at the, 
time—he said what that means is that Europe will once again be whole and free, and that Eastern Europe 
will be included within NATO. That was self-evident to a lot dm knowledgeable obsefvers in 1990. 
Why can't we see the implications of that now? 
SCHAKE: We can see the implications of it, but it is not a question of whether you want Poland, 
Hungary, and the Czech Republic in NATO. I think there is a pretty strong consensus throughout the 
alliance that you do. It is a question of managing change strch„that Aussiadoes not.becorne_a_greater. 
threat to them, so that you attempt to pull out Russia into the system while kis clear that they are in such _ 
a period of flux that you may not be able to. If it is clear that RpAsia is a threat to them, then there is,no - 
question about our reaction—you pull them into NATO, 404 buildthe wall a.littlelporeeastward. But _ 
while that is not clear, it strikes me that it is not an unworthy oblectivefor the administration to-buy tinie 
to see where they are going,to give the East Europeans some reassurance_but not creating a Russia that 
is going to be harder for everyone to deal with. 
HENRIKSON: Well, one of the foundations, if not the most important foundation, of security is 
certainty. Anybody familiar with European history cannot help but think of,thetreative:vapeness about 
Belgium, and the vagueness about Poland in 1939. I rnean who is to say that a Russian general will not 
encroach upon Polish territory. And what will we do then? Why_not_respond to this Polish foreign 
minister who is asking for something from his point of view-and our pOint of view toosbeciuse_we lived 
through this history or learned about it? Why not respond to,that ip a way thai is indicative of the long-
term situation? 
SCHAKE: You think the sixteen NATO members would_ratify_member for_P_oland, Hungary, ancl the__ 
Czech Republic now? 
50 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 14]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
NATO AND THE UNITED NA77ONS 
HENRIKSON: That is where political will and courage come in. Why not -make more evident and 
predictable in a certain way what the Partnership for Peace really means in terms of the inclusion of the 
eastern part of Europe in not only Europe itself, but the larger Euro-Atlantic community. With Russia 
being partly included to the extent they wish to be. One has to respect the fact that Russia is Russia, and 
let them work out whatever type of agreement they might want. 
TIDD: I am just curious of the logic for an expedited admission of the Visegrad countries. What is 
behind that logic? If it is to bring them in because they feel the most threatened, what makes the Baltic 
states any less threatened and yet we do not seem to be putting them on a fast track? If it is because they 
make the most convincing case for themselves, I have heard very convincing cases from Bulgarian and 
Romanian representatives that they too should become members. Bulgaria sells themselves as the best 
member because they are the only state that has good relations with both Greece and Turkey. 
HENRIKSON: And Germany. The German-Bulgarian relationship is of very long standing. You ask 
what the logic is: because those countries are the big ones. You get Poland into it, and Lithuania will 
worry a lot less about being part of the so-called near abroad. Actually, if something happened, even 
though President Bush, remember, was very reluctant to recognize the real independence of the Baltic 
states, it was very clear that if something really happened, not only the Nordic countries and Germany, 
but the US would be involved if only because of the-ethnic component of American-society-. Lt would 
be provocative to bring the Baltic states in by themselves. But if you do Poland, that is because that issue 
has really emerged now. The Baltic states are not really in a position to demand that sort of help right 
now. Those are the big three countries. They are organized. They are asking for it. And we do not know 
what is going to happen. It would have been easier to do this six months ago than it might be six months 
from now, depending on what happens in Russia. It might have had an effect on the Russian election. 
These are hard issues—I fully recognize that. 
LOREN: How interesting. The conversations have gone through:the point of trying-to pull-the ihread - - 
of creating a sense of security—whether you call it Partnershiplor Peace-or whatever—in the midst of the - 
uncertainties of not granting actual security guarantees. - •• • • , 
51 
• 
i 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 15]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
CONTRIBUTORS 
Alan K. Henrikson is the Director of The Fletcher Roundtable On a New World Order. He currently 
teaches at The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University and is also an Associate at the 
Center for International Affairs of Harvard University, where he has served as Counselor on Canadian 
Affairs. He has participated in the Distinguished Visitors Program of The Policy Study Group in Tokyo 
and was United Nations Development Programme-sponsored Visiting Professor of Diplomatic History 
at the Foreign Affairs College, affiliated with the Chinese Foreign Ministry, in Beijing. Additionally, he 
was Lloyd I. Miller Visiting Professor of Diplomatic History and Scholar-in-Residence at the Center for 
the Study of Foreign Affairs in the Foreign Service Institute of the U.S. Department of State. Professor 
Henrikson has written widely on the history and current problems of U.S. foreign policy, the North 
Atlantic Alliance and European Community, U.S. relations with Canada and Latin America, international 
cooperation in the Nordic/Arctic area, political geography, and multilateral organization and 
peacemaking. His publications include Defining a New World Order: Toward a Practical Vision of 
Collective Action for International Peace and Security  (1991) and Nesotiating World Order: The 
Artisanship and Architecture of Global Diplomacy (1986), which he edited. Alan Henrikson received his 
A.B., A.M, and Ph.D. in History from Harvard University. He also holds B.A. and M.A. (Oxon.) 
degrees from Oxford University, where he read Philosophy-Politics-and Economics (P.-P.-E.) as a 
Rhodes Scholar at Balliol College. He studied as well in Norway at the International Summer School of 
the University of Oslo. 
Robert L. Pfaltzgraff, Jr., is Shelby Cullom Davis Professor of International Security Studies at the 
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy. He is also president of the Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis 
(IFPA) of Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Washington, D.C. Dr: Pfaltziraff his Served is 'a cOnsultant 
to the National Security Council, the Department of Defense, the Department of State, and the U.S. 
Information Agency. He has taught at the University of Pennsylvania, the College of Europe in Belgium, 
the Foreign Service Institute, and the National Denfense College in Japan. His most recent publications 
include: Naval Forward Presence and the National Military Strategy (1993) (co-editor); The Future of 
Air Power in the Aftermath of the Gulf War (1992) (co-edifor); 'and Trinsatlanfic Relations in the 1990s: 
The Emergence of New Security Architectures (1993) (co-autlir). 
Robert D. Putnam, Clarence Dillon Professor of International Affairs, Director of the Center for 
International Affairs, and Associate Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Harvard University, is 
a specialist in comparative government and international relations. He has previously served as Dean of 
Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government and as chairman of Harvard's Department of 
Government. He is the author or co-author of more than thirty scholarly articles and seven books 
published in seven Ianguages, including The Comparative Study of Political Elites (1976); Bureaucrats 
and Politicians in Western Democracies (1981); Hanging Together: The Seven-Power Summits (1984: 
published in English, German, Japanese, and Italian); Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in 
Modern Italy (1993; published in English and Italian); and Double-Edged Diplomacy: International 
Bargaining and Domestic Politics (1993). Professor Putnam graduated from Swarthmore College with 
Highest Honors in 1963, attended Balliol College, Oxford, and in 1970 received his Ph.D. with 
distinction from Yale University. He has received honorary degrees from Swarthmore College (1990) and 
Stockholm University (1993). He taught at the University of Michigan for more than a decade, and served 
on the staff of the U.S. National Security Council at the White House before coming to Harvard as 
professor of government in 1979. A recipient of numerous awards and scholarly honors and a consultant 
to various governments and international organizations, he is a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts 
76 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 16]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
CONTNBUTORS 
and Sciences, where he direets a major interdisciplinary investigation of "Social Capital and Public 
Affairs:" The Economist has described his widely-discussed book, Making Democracy Work, as ."a great - - --
work of social science, worthy to rank alongside de Tocqueville, Pareto and Weber." His current research 
focuses on the revitalization of Western democracy. 
Uri Ra'anan is a University Professor in the University Professors Program, and Director of the 
Institute for the Study of Conflict, Ideology and Policy, of Boston University. He is also a Fellow of the 
Russian Research Center at Harvard University. Author, co-author, editor, or co-editor.of 23 books, and 
contributor to 19 others, as well as 21 monographs and Congressional publications, his latest publications 
include Russian Pluralism—Now Irreversible?;  State and Nation in Multi-Ethnic Societies: The Breakup 
of Multinational States; Inside The Apparat; Gorbachev's USSR: A System in Crisis; and The Soviet 
Empire: The Challenee of National and Demperatic Movements. His current research focuses on factional 
struggles and ethnic conflict in the former Soviet Union. Prior to his current appointments, he was 
Professor of International Politics and Director of the International Security Studies Program at the 
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, where he taught for two-decades. Before joining the Fletcher 
School, he taught briefly at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and, previous to that, at Columbia 
University and the City University of New York. He obtained his undergraduate and graduate education 
and degrees at Oxford University (Wadham College, 1945-1950). 
Kori Schake has been the NATO desk officer on the Joint Staff for the past three years. She is 
responsible for preparing the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for NATO meetings and participating 
in interagency working groups on NATO issues. She specializes in command and.control arrangements, 
military implementation of the Alliance Strategic Concept; and_European architecture. issues' She holds - 
a Bachelor's Degree in International Relations from Stanford University, where she studied with, and later -
worked for, Condoleezza Rice. She did her graduate work with Catherine Kelleher and George Quester 
at the University of Maryland, receiving an MPM.from the-School-of Public Affairs-and-MA-from--
Government and Politics. She continues to work on_her disseqation„,"NATO In Crisis:* Allied Politics 
of Berlin Planning, 1958-1962." 
Kurt W. Tidd, Commander, U.S. Navy, The Atlantic CininCil Of the Uniiid Sikes, is a 'Surface 
Warfare Officer whose operational assignments includeAliipb.pard,tpursin,USS.,SEMMES (DDG 8),„ 
USS AMERICA (CV 66), USS DEYO 
served as Aide and Flag Lieutenant to Commander,Sruiser:Destroyer Group..EIGHT.,, 
assignments include serving as Aide de Camp to the U.S. Representative, NATO Military Committee,. 
Brussels, Belgium, and in the Pentagon in the office,of the Chief oftNaval•Dperations,.Strategy- and- , 
Policy division. Commander Tidd earned a Master's inNiticatScience fiomffie University of Bordeaux,r,,, 
France, as an Olmsted Foundation Scholar. He is-a4989,-graduate_of,the Armed. Forces Staff toilege, 
is qualified as a Joint Specialist, and is a designated yolitical/Military,affairs_subspecialist in 
European/Russian area studies. 
- • - - Celeste A. Wallander is Assistant Professor-of -Government, Harvard University, and Faculty 
Associate of the Center for International Affairs and the RussianResearch Center. She received a B.A. .. 
(1983, political science) from Northwestern University and her Ph.D. (1990, political science) from Yale 
University. Her dissertation was a study of the effects of crisis bargaining and escalation incentives on 
Soviet use of military force in ten Cold War era cases. Her current research is on the role of international 
institutions in German and Russian security strategies in the current period after the Cold War. She is 
77 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 17]
C 0 6 6 9 0 2 8 8:1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021 
CONTRIBUTORS 
now editing a book on the sources of Russian foreign policy. She has received fellowships and research 
support from the Social Science Research Council, the German Marshall Fund of the United Siates, and 
the National Council for Soviet and East European research. She teaches courses on international relations 
theory, security, crisis behavior, and Soviet and post-Soviet security policy. 
Thomas G. Weston is Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of European and Canadian Affairs. 
Mr. Weston has been a U.S. Foreign Service Officer since 1969, serving in Europe, Africa and the 
United States. He has spent much of his career serving in and focusing on Central Europe. Mr. Weston 
was Deputy Chief of Mission at the US Mission to the European Communities from 1990 to 1993. This 
fall he assumed his current position, with primary responsibility in the European Bureau for multilateral 
matters, including NATO, arms control and the EC. Mr. Weston was educated at Michigan State 
University. 
Colonel Richard H. Witherspoon as Chief of the SHAPE Liaison Office, coordinates a broad range 
of issues in the Washington area for' the Supreme Allied Commander, Europe, the SHAPE staff, and 
subordinate headquarters in Allied Command Europe. Graduating from the United States Military 
Academy in 1968, he received a commission in the Field Artillery. He subsequently completed studies 
in the Field Artillery Officer Basic and Advanced Courses, the United States Army Command and 
General Staff College and, most recently, the United States Army War College. He holds a Master's 
Degree in International Relations from the University of California. Additionally, Colonel Witherspoon 
served with the 8th Battalion, 4th Field Artillery as a battery commander and assistant operations officer. 
He commanded a battery and served as Adjutant in the 2d Battalion, 6th Field Artillery in Germany, and 
commanded 2d Battalion, 17th Field krtillery at Fort SIII, Oklahoma. Other staff assigninents hive 
included Executive Officer, 6th Battalion, 14th Field Artillery and Assistant Fire Support Coordinator, 
1st Armored Division in Germany; government and International Relations Institute at West Point; 
Executive Assistant (Speechwriter) to SACEUR; Staff Officer-,—Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for 
Operations and Plans, Department of the Army; and Army Merribir of die-thaiiman's-Staff-Giiiup-, Mint 
Staff. 
78 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690288 Date: 07/22/2021