[Page 1]
C Q 6 6 8 717 2 RED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687172 Date: 02/09/2021 
. 1;11,.Ce MARINE TECH. . ID:7038938753 JUL 15'93 17:161+10.022 P.08 
• RELEASE IN FULL] 
Commonwealth Environmental Research & Development 
Program (CERDP) 
A Program for Defense Conversion and Privatization in the 
Newly independent States 
Financial aid to Russia and the other newly independent states is critical to stability 
in the Former Soviet Union and essential to the continued transformation of the economies into 
free markets. In order to transform the economy, particularly the Russian economy, it is 
important to convert the defense industry to civilian applications and privatize the state-
owned institutions. A closely related problem is the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction: in order to counter proliferation, the scientists and engineers currently employed in 
defense must transfer their research to civilian applications rather than market their defense 
research capabilities in the third world. 
The Commonwealth Environmental Research and Development Program (CERDP) will 
provide a key role for US private industry in defense conversion and industrial private 
enterprise creation in the Former Soviet Union. CERDP will provide productive employment 
for scientists and engineers previously occupied in defense research, convert advanced 
technologies from"defense, to civilian application, start up self-sustaining, small businesses in 
research and development, and provide technological solutions to critical environmental 
problems. 
CERDP represents a partnership, teaming the US Government and US private industry 
with the Russian scientific community. Private industry under US Government contract will 
employ over 650 defense scientists in Russia. These scientists will be employed in important 
research on environmental characterization and remediation. The Program _will provide the 
rapid transfer to the civilian sector of the benefits of -cleadet7:01;1-deleTtitt:tetiiiisilitty;i1. 
investments. Converting defense technology to environmental reseafeii:3401**-e,important_ 
contributions to solving environmental problems in the United Stitet,atAirell'ak,:theyorrriert,-, 
Soviet Union. CERDP will provide a sound return on investment to thse:Americanliwayer, -  - 
CERDP will support the creation of private enterprises in ftlissiOhrotigh_lthe.trainingm.-..„,___-_-__, '—
of Russian managers in Western business management technique% private_conipany:formation,_,, 
and identification of US industrial and financial partners for joint ventures. the,prpjectsTfunclid,;—-_,:_c7--...-,..2,
under CERDP will capitalize on unique Russian science and technology develcipthents, 
projects will result in salable products and services in the global market..1In _this:sense tERDP_ 
represents a closed-end investment by the US Government: the 0011e7iiiteipiisei,aleaked-3i.-z;-•.-z--
through CERDP will become self-sustaining. - - 
The CERDP program concept was developed by Science Applications Internation1,—... .„ ,_, 
Corporation (SAIC) in cooperation with the Russian Academy of SiienceiTtlie-Xii0inifiif=- 1: _ _ _ 
National Economy of the Russian Council of Ministers, and the MarylaTic144.46k5W:Initituteiof 
the University of Maryland. SAIC, the largest employee-oiVrie-d-US -research and 
development firm, has been working in the Former Soviet Union since 1991 in the conversion of 
state-owned defense enterprises to employee ownership. The RuSsian Aiademy of SdefiCes hat 
provided broad access to the Russian scientific community including defense research 
organizations to support CERDP. CERDP is strongly endorsed by leaders of the Russian 
scientific community, and officials of the federal and regional governments. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687172 Date: 02/09/2021