[Page 1]
C Q 6 6 8 7 1 8 1;1 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687181 Date: 02/09/2021 
PRESS RELEASE 
7 SEPTEMBER 1992 RELEASE IN FULL 
A NEW COMMISSION ON GLOBAL COOPERATION AFTER THE COLD WAR 
Stockholm/Kingston, 7 September 1992 - Co-chaired by former Swedish 
Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson and former Commonwealth 
Secretary-General Shridath Ramphal, a new independent Commission on 
global cooperation and governance makes its appearance on the world 
scene today. 
The Commission will explore the opportunities presented by changes 
in international relations after the end of the Cold War to build a 
more effective system of global security and cooperation. It will 
take into account how the world has changed since the United 
Nations was founded: the number of nations haS multiplied; new 
issues have come into prominence; new sources of fragility and 
danger have appeared; both countries and issues have become more 
interlinked; new global needs have been identified. 
The United Nations and its associated bodies will be a main focus 
of attention. The Commission will make proposals for their reform 
and improvement. 
The timetable calls for a report to be ready in early 1994. This 
would allow time for widespread discussion of its proposals in time 
for the 50th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, in 
1995. 
The Commission brings together 28 leading figures from all 
continents, serving in their personal capacity. They bring 
higt-level experience in many fields: politics, diplomacy, 
national, regional and international organisations, popular 
movements, finance, development. 
The origins of the Commission go back to April 1991 when, convened 
by Willy Brandt, political leaders from all over the world met in 
Sweden to launch the Stockholm Initiative on Commmon Security and 
Global Governance. They emphasized that as a result of the end of 
the Cold War, the opportunities for strengthening international 
cooperation had never been greater. Securing peace, democracy and 
sustainable development required-pations, in their common interest, 
to create a new system of global security and governance. 
The leaders meeting in Stockholm concluded that the time was ripe 
for a review in depth of existing institutions involved in global ' 
and regional cooperation, in particular the United Nations, and for 
practical recommendations to improve the system. They urged the 
creation of an independent commission to take on this task. Willy 
Brandt, Gro Brundtland and Julius Nyerere, who had themselves 
headed earlier international commissions, invited Ingvar Carlsson 
and Shridath Ramphal to chair the new Commission. 
Earlier this year, the two chairmen explained the purpose of the 
new Commission to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr 
Boutros Boutros-Ghali. He assured them of his support for the 
initiative. 
The first meeting of the Commission will take place in Geneva on 25 
to 27 September (Friday through Sunday). 
The new group will have as part of the background to its wcrk the 
reports of the Brandt Commission on development issues, the Palme 
Commission on security and disarmament, the Brundtland Commission 
on environment and development, and of the South ComMission led by 
Julius Nyerere. 
The Commission will have a small international Secretariat at its 
disposal. At the invitation of the Swiss federal government and the 
Canton de Genéve, the Secretariat will be located in Geneva. 
Funding for the Commission's work will be sought from governments 
and independent foundations. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepaTt-rneni-of-§t-ate" dahsoe CNOm.'"F:50 T-1-3-8134 Doc No. C06687181 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 8 7181 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687181 Date: 02/09/2021 
THE NEW INDEPENDENT COMMISSION 
CO-CHAIRMEN: 
Ingvar Carlsson, Sweden 
Shridath'Ramphal, Guyana 
MEMBERS: 
Ali Alatas, Indonesia 
Abdlatif A1-Hamad, Kuwait 
Oscar Arias, Costa Rica 
Anna Balletbo, Spain 
Kurt Biedenkopf, Germany 
Allan Boesak, South Africa 
Manuel Camacho Solis, Mexico 
Bernard Chidzero, Zimbabwe 
Barber Conable, United States 
Jacques Delors, France 
Jiri Dienstbier, Czechoslovakia 
Enrique Iglesias, Uruguay 
Frank Judd, United Kingdom 
Hongkoo Lee, Korea 
Wangari Maathai, Kenya 
Former. Prime Minister of Sweden. 
Former Secretary-General of the 
Commonwealth, former Foreign 
Minister of Guyana. 
Foreign Minister of Indonesia. 
Director-General of the Arab 
Fund for Economic and Social 
Developrnent, former Minister of 
Finance. 
Former President of Costa Rica, 
Nobel Peace Prize Laureate. 
Member of Parliament, former 
President of Spain's United 
Nations Association. 
Minister-President of Saxony. 
Director_of the Foundation for 
Peace and Justice, member of the 
ANC Executive. 
Mayor of-Mexico-City_and- Head - 
of the Féddral pištkidt.L--
Senior MiniSier Of'Finance, 
EconomiC-Planning and__ 
Development of-Zimbabwe.-
Former Pr-esidetit 
Bank. 
President-of the Commission of--
the European Communities. 
Former Foreign Minister of 
Czechoslovakia. 
President of the Inter-
American Development Bank. 
Member of the House of Lords, 
former Director of Oxfam. 
Ambassador to the United 
Kingdom. 
Professor, founder of the Green 
Belt Movement in Kenya. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687181 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 8 7181 1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687181 Date: 02/09/2021 
Sadako Ogata, Japan 
Olara Otunnu, Uganda 
I.G. Patel, India 
Celina Vargas do Amaral Peixoto, 
Brazil 
Jan Pronk, the Netherlands 
Qian Jiadong, China 
Marie-Angélique Savand, Senegal 
Adele Simmons, United States 
Maurice Strong, Canada 
Brian Urquhart, United Kingdom 
Juli Vorontsov, Russia 
SECRETARIAT 
Hans Dahlgren, Sweden 
Peter Hansen, Denmark 
United Nations High Commissioner 
for Refugees. 
President of the International 
Peace Academy, former Foreign 
Minister of Uganda. 
Former Governor of the Reserve 
Bank of India, former Director 
of the London School of 
Economics. 
Director of the Getulio Vargas 
Foundation, former Director of 
the National Archives of Brazil. 
Minister for Development 
Cooperation in the Netherlands. 
Deputy Director-General of the 
China Center for International 
Studies. 
Former President of the 
Association of African Women 
for Research and Development, 
member of the South Commission. 
President of the MacArthur 
Foundation. 
Secretary-General of the United 
Nations Conference:on-
Environment and Development. 
Fotd7FOUndation_Special_Fellow, 
former Under-Secretary-General 
of the United Nations. 
Nations, foreign policy adviser 
to President Yeltsim. 
Secretary-General of the 
Commission. 
Executive-Director,—member of 
the Commissoin ex officio. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687181 Date: 02/09/2021