[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 3 6 0=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690360 Date: 07/22/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL 
THE DIPLOMAT 
31 Meadow Wood Drive 
Greenwich, Connecticut 06830 
(203) 869-1199 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
Romania 1993 
Winter has settled over much of eastern Europe, Russia and the CIS countries. Early snows, 
driving winds and economic problems forecast dire problems for some peoples. These are 
nations still emerging from the jubilant overthrows of 1989, but still unaccustomed to providing 
for themselves financially, agriculturally and changing the mentality of the people to democracy. 
They are optimistic and willing to forge ahead. The problems lie still with Communist 
dominated regimes, lack of knowledge in the free market and the ability to hoist themselves out 
of the snare that took care of them. 
In Romania Ceausescu gave the people everything - jobs, homes, social welfare and leadership 
but he also took everything from them - their property, jewelry, furnishings and freedom. Few 
people were permitted to leave the country and even the most noted ambassadors, the Madrigal 
Singers were at times denied visas. The gates were locked to the outside world, no exchange 
programs, outside help, except from Russia, and trading partners existed within the Iron Curtain. 
Now all this has changed. Romania's growth is expected to be the largest of the eastern European 
block. Investors are streaming in from Turkey, Germany, Japan, and a few from the United 
States. Hotels lobbies are filled with wheeler-dealers, all puffing away on cigarettes, drinking 
Romanian wines, beer or vodka. Talks center on when the nuclear plant will be finished, 
growing inflation, government incentives, who runs what or perhaps what amount could be 
given as a bribe. The Romanian people are well-eduacated, highly skilled and innovative. The 
projects that lie ahead will not take the last four years to come to fruition, but perhaps a 
generation or more. A major problem is lack of communication, trusting one another and 
working with the present administration. Major improvement will come through the 
revitalization of the infrastructure. New roads, oil exploration, telecommunications, airport 
facilities, financial institutions and human training must be part theof scheme. Some new 
agreements are in place for public transport, tourism and the completion of a nuclear power 
plant. 
The government has thrown open the doors to foreign investment, liberalizing the exchange rate, 
providing tax holidays, technical assistance, new licensing methods and other incentives. The 
most prominent reform has been the privatization of major businesses, and employee buyouts of 
others. This has taken a lot longer than expected. Foreign investment has also made use of local 
labor, local companies and resources to produce a product affordable to the Romanian people. 
Most notable among the American companies is Colgate, whose products are found on many 
stands in the outdoor market places. 
The need is not only financial, but technical as well. 100% foreign ownership is permitted 
through joint ventures. Buildings are owned , not land. Free trade zones have been developed at 
Constanta, Sulina and along the Danube. A new World Trade Center complex in Bucharest with 
office buildings and hotels is scheduled for completion shortly. And the Stock Exchange is 
expected to open this month. Changes in the social welfare system are proceeding slowly and the 
country has been faced with an HIV tainted blood scandal, orphan and Gypsy problems. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690360 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 0 3 6 0 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CO6690360 Date: 07/22/2021 
The Future ? Forgetting a past is difficult with the present high government officials . A new 
generation of younger ministers are leading the country. They were the forced labor and 
isolated intellectuals of the 70's and 80's and they will bring the change. It won't come easy. 
Some will take advantage of certain groups, the recent Ponzi scheme for instance. Others will 
march for better wages, over 100,000 participated recently in a union walk, and inflation is 
rising daily. But they are a gutsy people, who over thousands of years faced invasions for their 
gold and silver and at one point Romana was the world's major producer of oil. Resources like 
this will get them through. But it will take time. 
We take so much for granted here in this country. We all should visit Romania to see what it is 
like to do without supplies, money, heat and electricity. Living in a community such as 
Greenwich, Connecticut I have learned to appreciate the dollar, to recycle- whether it be taking 
my own bags back to the supermarket, or conserving on water. When it snows I know the streets 
and sidewalks will be swept. I will always have running water. And I know that we live in a 
democratic country, with a President elected by popular choice. Freedom is delicious and should 
be appreciated. 
We read about so many places suffering in the world, but sometimes shut out those who 
desparately want and need our assistance. As these new nations get on their feet let us help them 
too. Never again will they permit a socialist regime, but they need the financial and technical 
help to achieve this goal. The United States must be more agressive in this cause. Giving 
Romania Most Favored Nation status gets us closer. 
Katherine B. Holmes 
t Editor 
©1993 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690360 Date: 07/22/2021