[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 7 0 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690702 Date: 07/22/2021 
JOHN V. WHITBECK 
Telephones: 
Telefax : (331) 42663591 
Mr. Awaham Burg, M.K. 
Chairman, Education + Culture Committee 
The Knesset 
Jerusalem 
Israel 
"Two States, One Holy Land" 
"Two Capitals, One Holy Citv" 
Dear Mr. Burg: 
B6 
RELEASE IN PART 
B6 
December 1, 1993, 
Thank you for your very kind letter of November 16 regarding the Cairo conference on 
my "Two States, One Holy Land" framework for peace. I am sorry that you were not able to 
attend but trust that one or more of your four Knesset colleagues who did attend has been able 
to give you a sense of the substance and spirit of our discussions. 
Enclosed herewith are the list of our 27 participants, the text of my opening remarks 
and the text of an agreed press release read and distributed at a press conference on November 
14, after which Eli Dayan and Nabeel Shaath answered questions from the press. The photo 
caption on the front page of the Jerusalem Post (also enclosed) suggests (unintentionally) that 
my framework for peace has become "the peace process". I wish it were so! 
I am particularly pleased that you have written that my proposal for the future status of 
Jerusalem "deserves serious consideration". Our participants were unanimous in their belief 
that, in any final status settlement, Jerusalem should remain physically undivided. However, 
there was no consensus on how the problem of sovereignty should be solved, and many 
participants, on both sides, clearly had difficulty comprehending how "joint undivided 
sovereignty" could possibly work on the ground. Over the years, I have had to recognize that 
"joint undivided sovereignty" is a concept which even highly intelligent people are often 
unable to comprehend. Perhaps, paradoxically, it is too simple to be easily understood. 
In this context and in light of your interest, I would like to set forth below four points 
regarding 'joint undivided sovereignty" which I made in introducing the discussion of 
Jerusalem at our conference and which I believe are important: 
1. It is essential to distinguish between municipal administration and sovereignty. 
Questions of municipal administration, including the division of authorities between an 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690702 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 90 7 0 2 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690702 Date: 07/22/2021 
umbrella municipal council and smaller district councils, exist for any city, regardless of any 
questions of sovereignty. In Jerusalem's case, it would probably be desirable, employing the 
European Community's principle of "subsidiarity", to devolve as many aspects of municipal 
governance as possible to the district council level, reserving to the umbrella municipal 
council only those major matters which can only be administered efficiently at a city-wide 
level. (Given the high degree of residential segregation within the city, drawing district 
boundaries so as to produce districts with reasonably homogeneous populations should not be 
a serious problem.) Sovereignty over Jerusalem is a symbolic, psychological and virtually 
theological question. Symbolism, psychology and theology are extraordinarily important in 
connection with Jerusalem (more so than with any other city on earth), but it is important to 
recognize that that is the nature of the question. To suggest an absurd example, sovereignty 
over Jerusalem could be assigned, as is sovereignty over Andorra, to the President of France 
and the Bishop of Seo de Urgel. Municipal administration would be unaffected. However, 
such a decision on sovereignty (like the less absurd example of an "internationalisation" of the 
city, with neither Israel nor Palestine having sovereignty) would serve no useful symbolic or 
psychological purpose for those most directly concemed. Assigning sovereignty over an 
undivided city both to Israel and to Palestine should satisfy to the maximum degree possible 
the symbolic and psychological needs of both Israelis and Palestinians and would serve as an 
inspiring symbol of reconciliation and hope for Jews, Muslims, Christians and the world as a 
whole. 
2. One of the beauties of "joint undivided sovereignty", and a potential advantage in 
making it acceptable to both peoples and their leaderships, is that it would not require either 
Israel or Palestine to renounce sovereignty over any territory as to which it has asserted 
sovereignty. The State of Palestine Asserts sovereignty only over those Palestinians lands 
conquered in 1967. Of those lands;the State of Israel asserts sovereignty only over expanded 
East Jerusalem. Under "joint undivided sovereignty", in the only place where sovereignty 
claims overlap, sovereignty would overlap and be shared. To repeat, neither Israel nor 
Palestine would have to renounce sovereignty over any territory as to which it has asserted 
sovereignty. Potentially intractable negotiations over where to draw international borders 
through and perhaps within Jerusalem would be completely avoided, since the city would not 
be partitioned but shared. 
3. Israelis should ask themselves what (if anything) they would actually be giving up in 
accepting "joint undivided sovereignty" over Jerusalem. Roughly 70% of the city's residents 
are now Jewish, and Palestinian residents already have the right to vote in municipal elections. 
That would not change. Put most simply, all Israel would have to do is say this: "Undivided 
Jerusalem, within the expanded boundaries which we have unilaterally established, is the 
eternal capital of Israel... but, in order to make peace possible, we accept that it is also the 
capital of Palestine." That's all. While, today, only Costa Rica and Zaire even recognize West 
Jerusalem as Israel's capital, if Israel adopted such a position and implemented it, the world 
community would promptly recognize unified Jerusalem as Israel's capital. Embassies would 
move there. Is this really so awful and unthinkable for Israelis? Is this really impossible? 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690702 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 9 0 7 0 2:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690702 Date: 07/22/2021 
4. If one accepts the two premises that (1) no Israeli government could ever accept a 
redivision of Jerusalem and (2) no Palestinian leadership (and certainly not the Arab and 
Islamic worlds) could ever accept a definitive settlement which gave the Palestinian State no 
share of sovereignty in Jerusalem, then, as a matter of pure logic, "joint undivided 
sovereignty" is the only conceivable status for Jerusalem upon which agreement could be 
reached. However, even if the first premise is untrue (there being no reason to believe that the 
second premise might be untrue) and a redivision of sovereignty in Jerusalem could be agreed 
upon, agreeing instead on "joint undivided sovereignty" could still have profound positive 
psychological benefits on the quality of "life after peace" for both Israelis and Palestinians by 
requiring in fact and in spirit a sharing of the land and cooperation with "the other" rather than 
simply a partitioning of the land and toleration of "the other". 
In the October speech which I sent you, I said that "I have never had any illusion that 
this framework for peace would be the first choice of either side. However, I believe that it 
could well be the second choice of both sides." The same is clearly true with respect to my 
solution for Jerusalem. Exclusive Israeli sovereignty over the whole city would presumably be 
the first choice of most Israelis, but this is clearly unacceptable not only to Palestinians but 
also to the Arab and Islamic countries with which Israel wishes to have normal diplomatic and 
economic relations and which would accept any settlement terms which the Palestinians might 
accept except that one. A redivision of sovereignty strictly in accordance with the pre-1967 
border would clearly be the first choice of most Palestinians, but this is equally clearly 
inconceivable from the Israeli standpoint. Based on the principle accepted by our conference 
participants that "there will never be a durable peace in the Middle East without a solution to 
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict acceptable both to most Israelis and to most Palestinians", these 
irreconcilable "first choice options" must, logically, be discarded by all who truly wish to 
achieve peace. Such people should be searching now for a mutually acceptable "best second 
choice". I persist in believing that 'joint undivided sovereignty" is either the only possible 
second choice or the best possible second choice. 
You have kindly written, "If I can be of any further assistance to you, please let me 
know". You could be of a great assistance by seriously considering "joint undivided 
sovereignty" for Jerusalem and discussing the possibility with your Knesset and Labour Party 
colleagues. If Israelis and Palestinians can agree (even silently) that a mutually acceptable 
solution for Jerusalem does exist, I believe that all the other pieces in the delicate peace puzzle 
will fall into place. Without a mutually acceptable solution for Jerusalem, everything will fall 
apart. That cannot be permitted to happen. 
Very truly yours, 
B6 
 John V. Whitbeck 
(enc) 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690702 Date: 07/22/2021