[Page 1]
CO6686900 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686900 Date: 02/09/2021 
The Financial Times 
Number One Southwark Bridge 
London SE1 9RL 
via fax 071 873 5938 
Sir, 
A NICHE FOR THE HERD 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Now into its third year, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
faces widespread criticism for improper spending and slow turnaround on project 
approvals and disbursements for its customers in the formerly Soviet-dominated 
countries of central and eastern Europe. Last month's resignation of bank 
president Jacques Attali in the face of press and shareholder attacks has forced 
the bank to reconsider its role in the transition, transformation, and 
integration of the former East Bloc .countries into the world economy. Yet the 
recent calls for the bank's radical restructuring, or even dissolution, ignore 
the positive impact of its contributions thus far, as well as the growing effect 
of EBRD-sponsored projects on the primitive infrastructure and private markets 
of the central and east European region. The European Bank does indeed have a 
vital role to play (FT article, 6-26-93) in the region's future, most 
particularly in the financial sector, where the bank's funds can be leveraged to 
provide a substantial number of grassroots loans for the growing entrepreneurial 
classes of the newly-marketized economies.' 
It is in fact erroneous to conclude that the EUropean Bank's contributions to 
post-Soviet economic reform have lacked coherence, as has been charged in a 
recent European Community report. The EBRD established at an early stage its 
mission and priorities for investment (telecom, energy, transport, financial), 
and sought to strike a balance between state-oriented infrastuctural projects 
and merchant banking transactions targeting the fledgling private sector. 
Accusations of insufficient loanmaking activity and_slowbureaucratic_methods on 
the.pert of the EBRD have had high shock valte,_but_arenot_borne out.by-the,—
facts. The bank's latest figures show Ecu 1.5billion in funds committed and 
fully Ecu 2.3 billion in transactions approved; with these additional deals in 
the pipeline, it is clear the European Bank continues to accelerate its 
activity, so it is therefore misleading.to.viewactual disbursal amounts as 
evidence of bank incompetence. Administratively, the speed with which the 
organization was set up in 1991 impressed even its harshest early critics; 
today, if the bank errs on the side of caution in providing loans and equity to 
businesses with virtually no experience in reality-based markets, it is merely 
following prudent banking practices, reflecting the enormity of the tasks 
involved in identifying, structuring, negotiating, documenting, and executing 
these deals in what has literally been virgin banking territory. 
Some have questioned the relevance of the EBRD as a banking institution, owing 
to its apparent similarity to cornmercial banks in the West. Two important 
aspects of the European Bank serve to highlight crucial differences between the 
bank and its more traditional Western counterparts, however. The backing the 
bank receives from governments large and small adds substantial comfort to the 
institution's partners as well as to its bondholders. Mbre importantly, the 
EBRD's mandate to make loans and equity investments is rigourously followed, in 
sharp contrast to U.S. commercial banks, for example,. which have done little 
- 1 - 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686900 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6-6 86  9 0 0 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686900 Date: 02/09/2021 
more of late than borrow from the Fed and lend to the Treasury, unless one 
considers their endeavours in risky, off-balance-sheet, zero-sum foreign 
exchange and government securities trading schemes. The funds disbursed by the-
EBRD have had, and will continue to have, a significant impact on country and 
regional infrastucture and production in the East; indeed it is not the European 
Bank, but rather Western and particularly American banks, that have more 
properly the burden of responding to charges of irrelevance. 
The European Bank's mission is to catalyse, not originate, investment 
transactions: if there exists no market demand, the bank is under no mandate to 
provide funds. Its caution in evaluating prospective projects has been widely 
noted, but in the current circumstances much care needs to be taken to ensure 
that monies can truly be directed to, and absorbed by, small and medium-sized 
businesses in the local and regional economies. Certainly, special attention is 
needed to avoid the mistakes of the 1992 IMF Russian aid package, where it is 
, agreed much money was simply siphoned into bureaucratic pockets. 
The dependence on Western methods of credit evaluation is frustrating to many in 
central and eastern EUrope who have little experience with the difficulties of 
securing financing under true market conditions. Yet given the total lack of 
U.S. bank credit in the region, the criticisms of slow EBRD procedures not only 
overestimate the problem but also miss the point: if Western and particularly 
U.S. banks were clearly seeing and acting upon the opportunities now evident 
most especially in Poland, Hungary, and Czech Republic, a case could then be 
more properly made that the EBRD is in fact duplicating the activities of 
traditional banks. The question is one of markets, not operations; the EUropean 
Bank is dedicated to focusing on a region that Western banks have unecessarily 
overlooked. 
One tangible difficulty highlighted in the current debate concerns the EBRD's 
large size and scale, which limit its funding to transactions only Ecu 5 million 
and above. With a maximum contribution of 35% per project, the bank thus 
participates only in projects starting at:about:ECu 15 millionvan amount far 
too large to benefit entrepreneurs in the centvrai and eastEUrcpean.regiop., The, 
bank has attempted to remedy the problem by contracting_on_an_agency_basis with 
banks such as Societe-Generale and Creditanstalt-Bankverein to.provide, 
loans, but these attempts have foundered .9n t*se large _banks'. , _ 
effectively review and administer community-sized bank deals.
But a solution to this dilemma may well beiE_hand. _The,idea of smaller Western 
banks providin4 credit evaluations for loans2at_the grassroots level isTsound._ 
If community-based lenders can be found toLpariciPatedn_organiiations_inspired 
by, for example, the Polish-American rEfiterprise Fupd's Enterprise.Credit 
Corporation, which contracted for credit services frOM dhiCi4O's boutii Shore 
Bank, it is likely that a network of small lending organizations, funded by the 
European Bank and necessarily including the most enlightened of local Eastern 
banking partners, can provide the mechanisms for the delivery of much-needed 
capital for growing, well-managed enterprises. Further, the leverage created by 
debt participation in this type of project by private investors As well as by 
institutions such as the International Finance Corporation can, even at prudent 
development bank-type ratios, effectively multiply the funds available for 
central and east European investment without an attendant increase in risk. 
Those looking for a niche for the EBRD would do well to consider an increase in 
- 2 - 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686900 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 86 9 0 0 7IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686900 Date: 02/09/2021 
the bank's role as catalyst in the creation of multi-sponsor, private sector, 
grassroots lending institutions. Such enterprises would provide much-needed 
banking skills transfer, help the development of local and regional economies, 
create a clear audit trail to prevent misapplication of funds and, with board 
membership for the EBRD and oversight by international regulators, provide an 
incentive to embark upon a much-needed strengthening of international financial 
systems. 
New businesses are sprouting up all over central and eastern Europe that, with 
access to credit, can provide jobs, increase incomes, and solidify the advances 
made thus far toward market reform. The European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, as one the the few regional institutions created specifically to 
assist in the transformation of the former Soviet empire, is well-positioned to 
perform the vital function of helping to create multinational, joint venture 
lending institutions in order to strengthen the credit pipeline all the way down 
to the local level. Such would be an efficacious way to deliver much-needed 
grassroots financing in short order to the nascent, entrepreneurial, production-
oriented classes of central and eastern Europe, upon whom lasting reforms 
ultimately depend. 
Sincerely, 
Jack Sustman 
President 
Patient Capital, Inc. 
2018 Hollywood Court 
Wilmette, IL USA 60091 
708-251-7536 
Research Associate 
University of Illlinois 
Russian and East European Center 
Champaign, IL USA 61820 
July 9, 1993 
- 3 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686900 Date: 02/09/2021