[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Talbott-Kozyrev One-on-Ones in Moscow 
First session: October 17, 1995, 7:30-9:15 p.m. 
After opening pleasantries about our respective airplane 
sleeping techniques (Kozyrev favors eye shades, cognac and 
complete relaxation, i.e., "no thinking about Bosnia"), Kozyrev 
asked me where I thought we were on Russian participation in 
IFOR. I said I thought we have a chance to reach agreement on a 
framework and noted the significance of Generals Clark and 
Osterthaler huddling with their MOD counterparts just a few doors 
down the hall. I said I thought that if the military could get 
down to practical issues, we might break the back of the problem. 
I noted that Deputy Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov had asked 
four questions at the end of our expanded session that had ended 
a few hours earlier: 1) could Russia genuinely be in on the 
planning of IFOR? 2) could Russia "approve" the operational plan 
before it goes to the NAC for approval? 3) could Russia sign an . 
MOU with NATO on the role of its forces in the operation and on 
the rules of engagement? and 4) would there be some kind of 
ongoing political/military consultative mechanism during the life 
of the operation? I said our answer to all four questions was at 
least a qualified "yes" and we would try over night to flesh them 
out and put them on paper. (We tabled a "four yes's" paper the 
following day in the joint MOD/MFA meeting.) I told Andrey that 
our goal for Hyde Park remains to try to agree on a framework for 
Russia's participation in IFOR, but there are still significant 
differences in our concepts of command and control and political 
authority for the force. Clearly some of our red lines and 
Russia's now cross. .Our delegation would try its best to make 
those lines parallel so that we can carve out a cooperative 
arrangement between them. 
Kozyrev raised the question of the size and function of the 
Russian contingent. I reminded him that, in Washington a few 
weeks earlier, he had talked about a relatively small number of 
Russian troops performing nonlethal functions. But in Geneva, 
Grachev talked about sending a reinforced armored division. 
said I thought we needed to move the discussion back toward 
Kozyrev's concept. 
Kozyrev asked where we were on command and control of the 
operation. I said I thought the military had had good 
discussions and the Shevstov-Joulwan talks on Friday, October 20 
would be key. 'Then I briefly reviewed our bottom line: 
unity of NATO command; and 
no dilution of the chain of political direction from 
the NAC to NATO forces.
1 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 2]
C 06 6 9 80 7 6=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
But, I continued, within those parameters, we were looking 
hard for ways to give Russia political cover and we'd come up 
with three mechanisms: 
a UNSC resolution to grant authority for the force 
which would not mention any specific country or 
organization by name, a la Desert Storm; 
the establishment of some kind of consultative council 
composed of all troop contributing countries, which 
would review the NATO operational plan; each nation 
could then decide whether or not to participate. This 
review would be a one time thing, but we would also 
arrange some kind of a political/military consultative 
structure for the life of the operation. 
Russian retention of "national command" authority which 
would allow Moscow to withdraw from the mission at any 
point if it did not agree with the way things were 
going. 
But, I continued, we knew that the use of force was where 
the rubber would meet the road for Russia. This would be the 
most difficult issue to deal with becausethe U.S. could not 
allow the real-time operation to be second guessed outside of 
NATO. 
I said we saw three possible outdomes. Our preferred Option 
was to integrate Russia fully into IFOR, but this would require 
Russia granting NATO operational or tactical control over its 
forces, while retaining national command. Igor Ivanov had told 
me that Russia could not agree to work "in or under" NATO. I had 
responded that our option could reasonably be called "in_or with" 
NATO. Kozyrev laughed at my effort to slice—the prepositions so 
finely. 
I said our second option was find gome liSeful military 
functions for Russia to perform in the reconstruction and other 
non-lethal tasks that would not require complete integration with 
the peace implementation force. This could be worked via a 
Russian liaison relationship to IFOR, but would not require them 
to cede operational or tactical corrimand-: —I-noted-that-Perry had 
not really laid this option out for Grachev in Gerieva because 
Grachev had been so fixated on sending a division. Our third and 
least favorite option, what we call the "zerci option", would be 
for Russia to opt out of IFOR altogether, but continue its 
important "political role" in the Contact Group and in non-
military aspects of implementation. 
Kozyrev said he had a very basic question: what kind of 
arrangement would be less damaging to the overall U.S.-Russia, 
NATO-Russia relationship? To help him "think out loud," he asked 
2 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
me to explain how we would define the mission of IFOR and itvs 
legal authority for operations. I said IFOR's mission would be 
"to enforce the peace settlement" reached by the parties. It was 
no accident, though, that "force" was the root of the word 
"enforce." Although we'd be enforcing a signed peace agreement, 
it would be a settlement between a bunch of characters who have 
already demonstrated how hard it is to preserve pace among them. 
The military mission, by its very presence, its strength and its 
willingness to use force if necessary must therefore be capable 
of inducing the parties to behave and of deterring misbehavior. 
Kozyrev replied that if this was our description of the 
force, he felt it left little room for joint action. He stressed 
that there is already deep-seated suspicion in Russia that the 
real function of IFOR will be enforcement against one side -- the 
Bosnian Serbs. "You'll explain that it's because of theTO 
particular stubbornness, but that won't be understood by the 
Russian public or by our foreign policy class. Everyone here 
suspects there will never be air strikes against the Bosnians no 
matter what they do. Other means will be used -- persuasion, 
economic pressure -- that's simply the reality." 
The moment the first air strikes begin against the Bosnian 
Serbs, we'll be in trouble, he continued: -"Lots of people here 
are saying that Russia is not being consulted because we would 
never give you a green light if we had a veto; if we don't have a 
veto, it's the old story again. Our guys say Russia is not 
consulted, we have no influence, on and on. This is the 
political reality here and it causes damage to our partnership. 
And of course our internal politics are particularly volatile now 
because of the elections." 
14y question," Kozyrev continued, "IS-h-oW-dan we rimit--the-
damage? How can we create something-that-dbee'n't-prove out — 
partnership mechanisms are ineffective. One option is to create 
a real mechanism, with a real veto power for Russia or some other 
kinds of guarantees that the operation fall- be acceptable fo-
Russia -- that it'll be pro-Serbian, or at least not as anti-
Serbian as the West has been." - r 
The second option, he said, "is to try to avoid joint 
responsibility." NATO air strikes-are a probleM not just because 
they are air strikes but because they are seen as anti-Serb and 
one-sided. They are not seen as an-impartial—use-of fOrde. - 
After all, the Croats also engage in military offenses and they 
never get bombed. Also, UNPROFOR is supposed to be a UN 
operation where Russia has an equal say and a veto in the UNSC. 
After the air strikes, people here said NATO had taken over the 
UN, that it was abusing the UN umbrella and Russia can't do 
anything about it. 
So, Kozyrev went on, if its not a UN operation, wouldn't it 
3 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
be easier to create an arrangement where "the parties have 
invited NATO to force them to behave? It would be as if, in a 
sober moment, they understood it was necessary to have police 
oversee their behavior. That way, we could say Russia was not 
consulted so Russia is not responsible for how the policemen 
enforce the peace." 
Then the only question would be how to fit Russia into the 
picture. "We could keep our peacekeepers in the Sarajevo suburbs 
and along the Brcko-Posavina line; our job could be to guard the 
Serb populations there in coordination with the rest of the 
operation. Then there would be no question of who on the Russian 
side agreed with NATO air strikes -- no banging of dishes. It 
would be up to you and the parties what you do. We'd have no 
responsibility and we would not be party to the operation." 
Kozyrev stressed this was not a formal position. He was 
just thinking out loud. The Presidents, he said, should make the 
final decision when they meet at Hyde Park so it was important to 
set "clear, sober options" before them. It was better, Kozyrev 
said, not to conceal the'problems. "We should look reality 
squarely in the face and consider the practical results." 
A consultative committee might be good at the planning 
stage, he suggested, and the word "enforcement" was innocent 
enough. Even Grachev agrees on that. The problem starts over 
"enforcement of whom?" and "for what?" "When it's against Serbs, 
it's a different story. That's when the problem starts." 
I said his proposal reminded me of Winston Churchill's 
definition of democracy: it's the worst system imaginable, 
except when you consider the alternatives. His Option One would 
give Russia a veto, allowing the RussianSTto-st-op-the military - 
action necessary to make the mission-work.-=-In-our-view,-a 
Russian veto equals paralysis of the-6perdtion;—'1-f the-mission's 
effectiveness is destroyed, the result will-be more war in the 
Balkans. I told him he was suggesting at least two keys. Under 
his option, Akashi would have more -responsibility than the 
generals in the field and we'd end up with a steadily declining 
mess. 
Whether he could admit it or-noti-Balkin-peace-was-finally- --
within reach in large measure becauselwe:had-at last-thrOwnaway--
the second key and gotten serious about-the use of force; Even 
the Serbs agree that's true. A Russian veto would. equal' 
paralysis which would mean more war and a'Spreading of the 
conflict. 
I told him his Option Two in which Russia wouldprotect the 
Serbs in certain areas, sounded dangerously like post WWII 
Germany. It would carve Bosnia into sectors. Russian troops 
would be squared off across the cease-fire line against 
4 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 5]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
Americans, British and French. Kozyrev agreed that the German 
example weighed heavily on his mind. But, he argued, "this time 
there will be no driving ideological force like we had in Berlin, 
no Soviet Union trying to impose its own way of life. Now we 
have agreement between the sides. We'll have an agreed map. If 
the Serbs don't want to vacate certain territories, you can throw 
them out. If the Serbs start an offensive across the green line, 
you can use force to stop them." 
But, he went on, in two areas the Bosnian Serbs are 
concerned for their safety. There are 120 thousand Serbs living 
in Muslim areas in and around Sarajevo. "The only reason the 
Serbs perpetrated more violence is because they had more tanks, 
not because the other guys were so moral. The Serbs have a 
legitimate concern about their enclaves around Sarajevo. The 
Posavina Corridor will have to be vacated by the Muslims. We can 
put Russian troops there to give the Serbs more assurance. But 
they won't be heavily armed. Our troops will not do enforcement. 
They'll only perform `passive peacekeeping' functions. They 
won't be there to establish socialism or stop capitalism like in 
Berlin. The purpose will be different. It'll be `classic 
peacekeeping,' with no enforcement capability. This would be our 
contribution under a `no UNSC resolution' option." So he's 
talking about no SC resolution at all! 
I responded that even lightly armed Russian peacekeepers 
could be in danger, and dangerous, as the-Serbs'-"protectors." 
Say the Serbs provoked an attack by the Croatians, the Bosnians 
or even IFOR. We could have IFOR firing across the green line at 
the Russians. A11 the Balkan parties are masters of 
manipulation. That's why we would never accept the idea of 
national sectors. It would be too-easy to-recreate on a supra-
national level the very same divisions that-toreBosnia apart. 
Our troops could also not accept al:radre-Ilia-ison-relitionehiiilwith-- ---
troops against whom they might end-upLin-combat;-:So-while 1-" - 
appreciated the candor and trust he-was showing by engaging in 
this kind of free-form brainstorminghoped that particulir --
idea would go no further. 
I told Kozyrev I could appreciate his problem with our 
Option One: Russia would have to give up tactical and operational 
command to non-Russians; they'd have to give up ultimate - 
political guidance to a body they aren't members of, the-NACf. 6nd- --
they could end up part of an endeavor that threatens and-perhaps 
uses force against Serbs. Nonetheless, we believed that if the 
U.S. and Russia worked together on cohdeiving, designing, 
approving and implementing the mission, there would be less 
chance of conflict between us than doing it his way. We also 
believe it will be a more effective force if we're in it 
together. The Serbs, and for that matter the Muslims, would be 
less likely to provoke something if we're united. 
5 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 6]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
I told him President Clinton wants us to work something out. 
He believes there is a better chance of securing peace in the 
Balkans if Russia and the U.S. do it together. A joint NATO-
Russia-plus-other-non-NATO-states mission in 95 could also set 
the stage for 96. Hyde Park may be our last chance to steady out 
the relationship before the tumultuous presidential election year 
in both countries. If, on the other hand, we have to agree to 
disagree on Bosnia and Russia stays out altogether, then our 
relationship will be subject to more buffeting than if we can 
agree to agree. 
Kozyrev asked for a fuller explanation of our view of 
political control over the various national contingents while the 
operation is underway. I replied that the NAC would have to have 
the final say, but we'd build consultative and liaison 
relationships from the top down to try to head off problems 
before they arose. We'd also use the joint operation to concert 
our leverage over the parties, with the Russians working on the 
Serbs and the US working on the Muslims just as we do in the 
diplomacy now. 
The problem, Kozyrev said circling back, is that we can 
manage all of it "until the moment of the first air strikes. 
You know what each strike costs in Russia. First, our people 
will say NATO is not impartial. I'm not saying it's the 
objective truth, but that's the strong impression here. They'll 
say this is how NATO is: it's anti-Serb; it ignores Russia's neods 
and views. NATO's real goal is to subordinate Russia to its 
will. Russia has been sucked into being part of the execution of 
a set of orders that were written elsewhere. We can have all the 
consultations you want, but the minute you start bombing Serbs, 
our generals will call Joulwan and-_say we_didn't give a green 
light. We've gone through this already-with-the UNSC.-,1-ItIL-be__,-
the same with IFOR. They'll come to.merand-sayy:'-how-come we're- - 
members of the UN Security Council=and-youoan't st-op this?,Our-= 
veto isn't worth anything! We've lost-oven- -_-The-,mechani-sm 
may be good on paper but it will blow-upz-in our----faces-when7=the-= 
action starts. That's why this needs to -be addressed by the 
Presidents. That's also why I like the liaison option [OUR 
OPTION TWO]. 
"If we're talking about your Option_One,"_he continued, 
"we'll need to address the question very clearly in Hyde Park. 
Not the details of the military operation -- Yeltsinvon't-be 
prepared for that. But it will be vory_important for Pres-ident 
Clinton to say clearly to President Yeltsini. 'if the Serbs - • 
misbehave, then there will be air strikes.'- Boris Nikolayevich 
has to understand that. Then he can make an informed decision 
whether he wants to participate or not_--, whether he wants to 
take the political risk; whether it's more important that Russia 
be integrated or that Russia be insulated from responsibility for 
strikes against the Serbs. Whichever option the President 
6 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 7]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
chooses, he must,understand it and support it completely. He 
must know what he is getting into. We've already had the 
experience of voting for a UN security council resolution and 
then finding out later that some very important people in our 
country didn't understand what we had agreed to [presumably a 
reference to the London Contact Group meeting consensus on how to 
interpret the various UNSC we believe authorized the August air 
strikes]. 
"For this reason, it would be a real mistake to find some 
superfluous and purely cosmetic modus vivendi between our 
militaries that conceals the real nature of the operation. At 
all costs we must avoid a situation in which Yeltsin returns from 
Hyde Park with the impression he's been granted a veto over NATO 
air strikes and then it turns out he doesn't have one. That's 
the main issue." 
I said I saw a real similarity in the approach he was now 
proposing and his approach to the Moscow Summit and the May NAC - 
- the key was to make sure Yeltsin understood what he was -- and 
what he wasn't -- getting out of Bill Clinton so that there would 
be no surprises. I said we were well aware that Yeltsin's 
opposition enjoyed lumping all the tough issues together --
Bosnia, NATO enlargement, ABM/TMD, CFE, I-ran reactors and even 
IMF funding -- and playing them back to the Russia public as 
Western efforts to humiliate and take advantage of Russia and 
Yeltsin/Kozyrev give-aways to Russia's enemies in the West. But, 
the alternative -- no Russian participation in Bosnia -- would be 
very bad too. Kozyrev readily agreed with this. 
Going on to the subject of peace conferences, I said 
virtually everyone in the USG hated.the-idea_of-a MosoW meeting-
prior to the start of the proximity,talks---The other,CGmembersz 
hated it too and it looked about 99';38-percentitiptissibIe-to 
entertain the idea and 99.98% impossible-to-Tpull it off.;,,--But,- I-
continued, I had talked about thematterz_earlier:__in-the-Aay-with 
Dick Holbrooke, and I associated myself:with,his entirely,ad-ref,
conditions: if we were able to nail-down ty-Hyde Park-Russia's 
role in IFOR and agree on terms of reference for the operation, 
then Holbrooke and I might be in the position of recommending to 
Secretary Christopher that the Moscow idea be considered 
internally within the USG. But we would have to:have-an iron.. _ _-
clad commitment that the meeting would be absolutely guaranteed 
to be content-free. We just could not risk the parties' 
reopening closed issues on the eve-of-the-proximity talks. 
Kozyrev said the meeting was essential to respond to the 
Russian public -- to prove Russia is not humiliated, especially 
since further air strikes would probably be necessary. Speaking 
"st-raight and also completely ad refereridum," Kozyrev said he 
thought it would be easier for Milosevic to be photographed next 
to Tudjman in Moscow. He could say to his own hard liners, 
7 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 8]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 76 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
"look, even Moscow wants me to shake hands with this bastard." 
The meeting would also show the Russian public that Russia is 
taken seriously, that it is playing an important role. In order 
for Russians to swallow more air strikes against "those bloody 
bastards, we have to have some credibility that we are part of 
the political process." 
Kozyrev said he envisioned a very constrained meeting and 
the release of a two-line statement saying, 1) that the parties 
are committed to continuing the cease-fire, and 2) that they are 
committed to start a real negotiating process in Dayton. He 
agreed the whole event would only have to last thee to four hours 
(we could do it in 15 minutes, Kozyrev said), and that the 
Contact Group countries could be represented by their local 
ambassadors. 
I said I thought I could only make an argument for the 
Moscow meeting on October 30 if the U.S. and Russia were working 
together on implementation. Without that, it would be too great 
a risk to the proximity talks. 
Kozyrev countered that no role for Russia in the operation 
was "of course the worst-case scenario." It would-be very 
negative for Bosnia and in a larger political sense. It would 
give a signal that Russia had failed to make its cooperation with 
NATO concrete. He said Yeltsin fully shared President Clinton's 
desire to find a way out, to create-some mechanism. But imagine 
the nightmare scenario if we create a faulty mechanism. The 
fundamental question for Yeltsin is whether he can risk 
cooperating with NATO. It is not an exaggeration to say the 
future of Russian democracy could be at stake. What happens, 
Kozyrev asked, if it all blows up later?--Th,Tre-will be a 
nationalistic groundswell that Russia=waS,fooled--agaim ,Everyonez- 
will say, "They made a decision to;b0mb withOut;=-OUrdonSent--eild=1:-
our troops are hostages in a NATO operation they,can4t-controi -
My worry, Kozyrev said, is that our entire methaniSt-blows-Up661-:— - 
the eve of our elections. ' .7 . , -7-- 7 -7 -71-.7. . 
As things now stand, ZhirinoVsky, ZyuganOV-[the,-COmmuniSt --
party leader] and the Agrarians will only get a combined 35-40-
percent of the Duma seats, Kozyrev.predicted.-__No single 
democratic faction will get more thanT7=pei,cent;-butiat léast the 
hard liners won't dominate the parliament:=-But -there are two 
things that could trigger a nationalist landslide: -an economic 
disaster of some kind, or a foreign-policy-disaster,--Any kind of-
new humiliation of Russia, he predicted, and the nationalists' 
numbers will go way up. "I'll beat Zhirinovsky's-sister in 
Murmansk if there are no dramatic pictures oh TV of NATO bombing 
Serbs. So the worst of all possible worlds for us would-be to-
sign a Igood arrangement' with NATO which turns out to be a 
humiliation for us. So, either we should not be party to the 
operation at all, or participate in a way that makes clear we 
8 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 9]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
agreed with the terms. No one really cares about the Serbs, they 
just care about Russia's face. We should settle this at Hyde 
Park." 
I pushed him hard on whether we couldn't settle it before 
Hyde Park, reminding him that he had recommended a month earlier 
that the meeting be completely pre-scripted. But he said he 
couldn't "pre-arrange it." The operation, he concluded, will 
invoke the use of force, and probably against the Serbs. Force 
will be used when it is needed and no Russian commander will be 
able to stop it because it will be a NATO operation. Only 
Yeltsin can sell that to Russia -- or stay away from it and 
explain why. He must say yes on these terms because there are no 
others, am I right?" he asked. I said he was exactly right. 
So, Kozyrev concluded, whether Yeltsin chooses to be in or 
out, the Moscow meeting saves it for him. Either he can say to 
Russia, "yes, I'm playing and I'm part of the decisions" or he 
can say "I'm abstaining -- I'm not going to be part of the 
military operation, but I'm still cooperating fully with NATO 
politically." 
After making sure I'd heard him right that he was suggesting 
we agree to a Moscow meeting on October 30 whether or not Russia 
is in IFOR, I said I did not see how I could posšibly-support the 
meeting without an agreement on IFOR at Hyde Park. I said I 
strongly doubted anyone else in our government would either. On 
Hyde Park, I reminded him that Budapest still rankles and it's 
important there be no surprises. We want Hyde Park to be Moscow 
on the Hudson, not Budapest on the Hudson. 
Kozyrev agreed and suggested that-we needa regular "safety 
line" (Russian equivalent of 911) fon:the tempestuous_peri-od 
ahead. He suggested that he and D-,continue our,regular=one,-on--
one meetings and that this channel.coul&-be,the-safety--,Iine: 
"Chris and I should of course see each. other :as. of-ten as_ ... - . 
possible, but it's sometimes easier-for-yourto,get-oven-here, and 
if Chris will permit, you can do so on his behalf." 
"President Yeltsin is truly committed to the partnership. 
He doesn't want confrontation. President-Glinton=_should-not - - 
doubt that, although Yeltsin's entourageis-_awful and many-of 
them do want trouble. So it's important we have a reliable 
channel in this difficult period. -It.would-be good if your 
President said something about this to-Boris Nikolayevich on 
Monday." 
I suggested that POTUS should suggest that Andrey and Chris 
stay in close touch; in practice, Chris would perhaps dispatch me 
from time to time if there seemed a need to do so, just as he had 
done a few weeks ago when the relationship was so tense over the 
air strikes. 
9 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 10]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 671ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
I concluded by reminding Andrey that the Bosnia operation 
did not have risks for Yeltsin only. A11 he had to do was turn 
on CNN to hear our Congress predicting a Vietnam-style quagmire 
and getting ready to start a "Who lost Russia?" debate if things 
go badly in Russia and in the relationship in '96. Kozyrev said 
he faces the mirror image. "I tell Yeltsin the same thing: all 
the nationalists want you to be tough with the Americans on 
Bosnia, but they'll really accuse you if the U.S. partnership 
fails. Yeltsin is absolutely committed to partnership," he 
repeated. "But the rules have to be clear so we don't get 
fooled." 
10 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 11]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
Second Session: October 18, 1995 
2:45-3:20 
Andrey opened by asking me how our meeting with Grachev had 
gone. I said the meeting hadn't made me optimistic about our 
chances of getting our Option One by Hyde Park -- or, for that 
matter, ever. The differences were just too great. But I had 
some hope for Option Two -- a smaller force, a more focussed, 
non-combat mission and no C2 relationship to NATO. The trouble 
was we'd been unable to get Grachev to engage on Option Two since 
it is clearly incompatible with his vision of Russia's role. I 
noted that the benefits of Option Two are that Russia can be with 
NATO, but not under it. Of course, there is also the "zero 
option" -- or, I added, "the Kozyrev option": Russia decides it 
is not consistent with its interests to be part of IFOR or to 
provide military units to the reconstruction effort, but it 
remains engaged politically, including in the Contact Group. In 
my report to the Secretary, I would say Option One would be very 
difficult to get, Option Two was possible, and Option Three would 
require us to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear. 
Andrey pleaded, only half-jokingly, not to call the last 
"the Kozyrev option." Officially, he said, "we have only one 
option, the Grachev version of Option One." He asked me what 
Russia's responsibility would be for air strikes under our Option.
Two. I replied that Russia would bear no responsibility since it 
would not be part of the military mission. That would leave 
open, however, the question of what sort of Consultative 
relationship Russia could have to IFOR. 
Option Three, Andrey warned, could make it look as though 
NATO had "squeezed Russia out." Or, I added, it could make it 
looks as though Russia had refused to play -- offered the choice, 
integration or isolation, it had opted for isolation. On our 
side, people would say NATO left the door of partnership open and 
Russia wouldn't walk through. But, Kozyrev said, we'll still 
have the Moscow meeting as a "safety belt." 
I said I had understood his message the previous evening on 
the importance of the October 30 meeting to them under any 
scenario. I repeated, though, that getting agreement for the 
meeting would be difficult but perhaps not totally impossible if 
they sign up for IFOR -- while it would be difficult and 
completely impossible if they opted out. 
On NATO expansion, I reviewed for him what Clinton would say 
to Yeltsin at Hyde Park: our goal would be to inoculate Yeltsin 
against the "ITAR-TASS" effect. [Last December, Yeltsin's temper 
tantrum over the NAC was motivated by a Russian wire-service 
account of what the NAC had done rather than all the careful pre-
explaining we'd done through diplomatic channels.] 
11 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 12]
C 6 6 9 8 b 7 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
In Hyde Park, President Clinton would also be prepared to be 
very blunt on Bosnia, including our sense of the ROE's, the use 
of force, et cetera. But, I stressed, it would be much better to 
end up with Option Two than the Zero Option. It would be easier 
to avoid the nightmare scenarios Kozyrev feared. ,And it would be 
much better to have no decision at all -- an agreement between 
the two Presidents to keep talking and working -- than to get the 
wrong decision or an irresolvable disagreement. 
"If I were in Yeltsin's place," Kozyrev said, "and I was 
considering saying 'yes' to Option Two, I'd be looking for some 
kind of dramatic wrapping for the agreement. I'd want to say 
`Yes, I'd agreed to an operation which would include real 
enforcement, but I've persuaded my friend Bill -- and he's agreed 
-- that this would be a truly impartial operation. If it comes 
to air strikes, they'll go both ways." But, he continued, if 
Yeltsin stands up and says this, you should do at least one 
symbolic strike against the Bosnians -- even if it means finding 
a bombed out tank, putting Bosnian markings on it and taking it 
to an empty field to blow it up. My point is we need to come 
back here and say, "yes, there will be air power, but it will be 
applied to both sides, proportional to the violations." 
I asked him if this would be his recammendation to Yeltsin. 
He said it would be if he could get enough private time to get 
through to Yeltsin. He said, "If I agree to advocate Optiori Two, 
I must also be able to argue from deep-seated belief that the - 
operation will be even-handed. If President Yeltsin say, 'yes, 
I've agreed to the operation but I have assurances it'll be 
impartial' -- and the public then sees that it's impartial, we'll 
stay on the same side. But if he makes that statement about 
impartiality and the next day the TV .is,tull,,ofair strikes-
against the Bosnian Serbs and none against the—Basnians or the 
Croats, we're in big trouble." 
I responded that President Clinton would-surely be.able to 
say that IFOR would respond impartially;to any-attacks'ori it. On 
air strikes, once IFOR is deployed we'll be primarily using 
helicopter gun ships for enforcement, not fixed wing aircraft. 
And there's no question that the Bosnian-Serbs would be more- - 
subject to punitive attacks than the-other parties,—as befits 
their standing as the principal aggressors and-the principal 
perpetrators of atrocities -- "the bloodiest of the bIdody 
bastards." 
I recalled that in our early conversations in the late 
70s/early 80s when he was at the UN working arms control and I 
was writing on the subject, we used to talk about "offsetting 
asymmetries." Same concept will apply-here: the use of force in 
Bosnia will be "impartial but asymmetrical." 
Andrey repeated that his comments about the terms under 
12 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 13]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
which Russia might accept Option Two had been purely ad ref. He 
repeated that wasn't even sure he'd get a chance to try these 
ideas on Yeltsin. For my part, I repeated that the Bosnian Serbs 
were "miserable bastards" and we had to plan for that. Kozyrev 
agreed: "yes, they're bastards, but we're the ones who are 
miserable." 
I asked him how to handle the upcoming meeting with 
Ryurikov. "Tell him Kozyrev was tough," he said with a big smile. 
"Much tougher than Grachev." 
I told him the proximity talks would be held in my home 
birthplace of Dayton and we joked about that. He rolled his eyes 
at the idea of an Air Force base. "Is that a hint to the Serbs?" 
"It's an impartial but asymmetrical hint. Ivanov will be 
there to make sure we get the nuances right." 
Andrey came back to his urging that we "package" Hyde Park 
properly. He suggest the two Presidents agree first on October 
30, then President Clinton should push for IFOR. I told him he 
could forget that sequence of topics. Okay, he said, then 
another technique would be to agree at the outset on the issues 
to be covered -- October 30th, IFOR and NATO expansion -- and 
then go back over them in detail, so that President Clinton would 
not have to commit himself on October-30 until hd'd heard what 
Yeltsin had to say on the other issues. It would-be essential, 
though, to create a positive feeling._ I. said, "Don't put too much 
emphasis or hope on October 30. It's tough under any 
circumstances, and particularly under the ones that are likely to 
prevail." 
Andrey also advised me to give-Ahe,"ndi-surprises"--mesage'to-
Ryurikov. 
Finally, Andrey came back suggested theLtwdPresidents: "1 ' 
discuss and agree on a "damage-control channelis We're'ehtering--a-7
period where there could easily be-a-miscue or bad information or 
reporting. Someone could run to Yeltsin; or Clinton for tha-t 
matter, with a quick, wrong-headedAmterpretation,-and -urge an • 
immediate tough response. That could roll-out—very--negatively:' 
The Presidents should agree that if-somethIng-comes up; they will 
check the information in the designated channel'before re-acting 
or jumping to negative conclusions:" I agreed and said our 
President would be prepared to talk about that. 
Standing up, just before saying good-bye, with no one else' 
in the room, I told him that it didn't,help our communications to 
have Vorontsov in Washington. Our experience was-that he was --
sometimes worse than no Russian point of contact in DC at all, 
since he seemed to twist unhelpfully messages in both directions. 
Kozyrev said he totally agreed but didn't have any way of fixing 
13 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 14]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 7 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019 
the problem. Perhaps President Clinton would say something to 
Yeltsin on the subject. No way, I said. Well, said Kozyrev, all 
the more reason we need plenty of contact like this one, i.e., 
the sessions we'd just had. 
14 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698076 Date: 07/25/2019