[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 4 2 2 SIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690422 Date: 07/22/2021 
r 1 
Progress Toward a World of Peace With Justice 
Giobal Report Richard Hudson, Editor 
RELEASE IN 
FULL 
The Binding Triad System for 
Global Decision-Making 
Center for War/Peace Studies F8111993 • NO.'39 
Corresponding With Bill 
AS THE WORLD FACES THE BOSNIA CRISIS 
Exchange With Clinton 
Sharpens Ethical Debate 
June 4, 1993 
President Bill Clinton 
White House 
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue 
Washington, DC 20500 
Dear Mr. Yresident: 
I aend you thie letter as a World War II veteran who 
is mortified et your feeble action in regard to the 
situation in the Former Yugoslavia. 
The iSternational community, and the United States 
as ite leading member, hae been disgracing itself in 
failing to deal with the genocidal events occurring 
there. 
I enclose the current issue of Globel Report! No. 
38, which Bete forth my views on what neede to be done 
nov. The bottom line is that you need to press the 
United Nations Security Council to give a mandate to 
NATO, along vith Russians and otbere, to move into the 
Former Yugoelavia to enforce e cease-fire and oversee 
the development of eome kind of peaceful arrangement 
among all those "Yugoslavians." 
You were right, long ago, about the Vietnam War--it 
was atupid. I call your attentioa to my editorial of 
October 1963 reprinted on page 2 of this iseue of 
Global Report. But now I urge you to bring your vision 
of those days into your Presidency of now. 
I am taking the liberty of sending copies of thie 
letter to some who I think may find it interesting. 
Love, law and peac 
A40644/ 
Richard Rudeon 
Executive Director 
Enclosure 
cc: Secretary Lee Aepin, Sandy Berger, Secretary-
General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary Warren M. 
Christopher, Leslie H. Gelb, Anthony Lake, Anthony 
Lewis, Winston Lord, Sir Brian Urquhart, Cyrue Vance 
THE WHITE HOUSE 
WOHMOITM 
July 27, 1993 
me. Richard Hudson 
Rxecutive.Director 
Center For War/Peace Studies 
218 Bast 18th Street
Nev York, New York 10003 
Dear Richard: 
I appreciate heariag your viewe on the situation in the 
former Yugoelavia. I am deeply concerned about the continuing 
aggreeeion there and the atrocities that are etill being 
inflicted upon the people of that,region.. 
I am working closely with my foreign policy team to help 
reaolve the preblemn tbat have caused this conflict. Bringing 
peace and stability to tbat area of the world ie one of my 
Administration'e aighest prioritiee. We face many tough 
choices in dealing with r.he tragedy in Bosnia, but it remains 
my intention to work witb our allies on a couree that will help 
repair the damage that this conflict hae done to the Balkans 
and to Europe. 
Thank you for youc interest in thia important Inoue. 
Sincerely, 
TvioN GAAAAstiv,
Dear Bill: 'The Danger of Fascism Is Being Posed' 
President Bi11 Clinton 
The White House 
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue 
Washington, DC 20500 
Dear Bill: 
September 27, 1993 
I very much appreciated your letter of July 27, 1993, especial-
ly since you addressed me as "Dear Richard" even though I 
have never had the pleasure of meeting you in person. 
I now write you a long reply because my sense of history tells 
me that you have been cast* willy-nilly into a role that will have 
considerable impact on the system of international relations for 
many decades to come. 
At a press conference in the United Nations on August 17, I. 
asked Bosnian Ambassador Muhamed Sacirbey this question: 
"If you were meeting with President Clinton today, what would 
you tell him in regard to Bosnia? 
He replied: 
The future of the free world is at stake in Bosnia. The ques-
tion of allowing fascism to prevail is being posed. The princi-
ples of the United Nations Charter are being betrayed in 
BOARD OF SPONSORS: S. 0.Adebo• Elisabeth Mann Borgese• Elise Boulding • Benjamin B. Ferencz•ThorHeyerdahl• Betty G. Lall•ArvidPardo• Russell W. Peterson 
Charles C. Price • Charles S. Rhyne • Maj. Gen. IndarjitRikhye(Ret.)•Yoshikazu Sakamoto•J, DavidSinger•Imisa T 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690422 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 0 4 2 21FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690422 Date: 07/22/2021 
Global Report Fall 1993 No. 39 
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Progress toward a peaceful settle-
ment will be possible only by a credible threat of force. 
I believe he is right. The consequences'of the failure of the 
international community to deal with the Bosnia crisis in terms 
of justice will be paid for by generations to come. It will be 
clear to all: Might makes right! 
I want to raise several points with you in regard to long-term 
structural changes in the United Nations system that are already 
beginning to occur as the world organization approaches its 
50th anniversary in 1995. But first, let me reiterate my view on 
what should be done in Bosnia and Herzegovina now, as set 
forth in Global Report No. 38, which accompanied my earlier 
letter to you: 
The choice seems to be either to let the Serbs—and the 
Croats too—get away with their genocidal "ethnic cleansing" 
by taking small but probably ineffective military steps, or to 
send in a strong NATO force under U.N. command, hopefully 
along with some Russians and others, to enforce a cease-fire 
and to remain long enough to ensure that these people figure 
out some way to live together. After all, NATO still has under 
its command some 3,000,000 troops, including 180,000 
Americans, who don't have very much to do. .... If Karadzic 
and his fellow "ethnic cleansers" were confronted by a column 
of NATO tanks and armored personnel carriers, with ample 
air cover, driving down the road to Sarajevo, they could be 
expected to rethink their course very quickly. 
As I perceive your foreign policy so far, you have wisely 
eschewed the two poles of nationalistic isolationism and world 
cop unilateralism, and embraced global multilateralism, with 01 
its complexities and frustrations. It is in this vein that I would 
like to offer some observations. 
What I call "The Mother of All Problems," the bankruptcy of 
the global decision-making system, has been scarcely noticed 
by most diplomatic practitioners. Item: 
• The U.N. Security Council, which in 1963 was expanded 
from 11 to 15 members, is today grossly unrepresentative and 
undemocratic in a radically transformed world. 
• The U.N. General Assembly, which has grown fronr 51 
members in 1945 to 184 today, is also grossly unrepresentative 
and undemocratic. (The smallest member in terms of population 
is San Marino, with 24,000; the largest is China, with about 1.1 
billion—a ratio of 45,833 to one. The smallest in terms of area 
is Monaco, with 1.21 square miles; the largest is the Russian 
Federation, with 6,592,819 square miles—a ratio of 5,448,611 
to one. Yet all have the sarne, single vote!) 
• The multilateral treaty-making system, especially at the 
global level, is obsolete. We have seen the pattern repeated time 
after time, in the Law of the Sea, in arms control and disarma-
ment negotiations, in the U.N. Conference on the Environment 
and Development (UNCED): A global problem is recognized 
and a conference is called to make a new treaty or convention. 
The attendance is not universal, the search for consensus drives 
the common denominator down to near meaninglessnesš, the 
enforcement provisions are negligible, the ratification process 
takes decades. 
There is a better way. It involves making a set of amend-
ments to the United Nations Charter as the organization moves 
through its Golden Jubilee in 1995 and on toward the 21st cen-
tury. The amendments should be as few as possible, but as 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. 
many as necessary. The most important amendment wauld be 
the incorporation into the U.N. Charter of the Binding Triad 
system for global decision-making, which would introduce 
weighted voting into the General Assembly based on-three fac-
tors: (1) one-nation-one-vote, (2) population, and (3) contribu-
tions to the U.N. budget. Decisions that receive these three 
majorities would become global laws, binding and enforceable. 
The U.N. General Assembly wofild have become a Global 
Parliament. 
Let me reminisce a little. In 1949, I was a young reporter on 
the Monrovia Daily News-Post in Southem California. One day 
the publisher, an ardent Rotarian, became ill and asked me to 
cover the weeldy Rotary Club luncheon. The speaker wis from 
the United World Federalists, as they were then known. I was 
astonished to fmd that there existed an organization dedicated 
to establishing a democratic world federal government that 
could replace the war-system with world rule of law. I joined on 
the spot, and have been an active World Federalist ever since. 
Back in those days, World Federalists laid great stress on 
Article 109 of the U.N. Charter, which stipulated the proce-
dures for calling "A General Conference of the Members of the 
United Nations for the purpose of reviewing the present 
Charter." The third paragraph of Article 109 reads as follows:*
If such a conference has not been held before the tenth 
annual session of the General Assembly following the coming 
into force of the present Charter, the proposal to call such a 
conference shall be placed on the agenda of that session of the 
General Assembly, and the conference shall be held if so 
decided by a majority vote of the members of the General 
Assembly and by a vote of any seven members of the Security 
Council. 
The clear reason that the Framers of the U.N. Charter includ-
ed this paragraph was that they wanted to encourage a review of 
their handiwork within 10 years at the latest. The tenth session 
of the General Assembly was to occur in 1955, and World 
Federalists were gearing up with their amendments to transform 
the U.N. into a democratic world federal government. 
Alas, in 1955, with the Cold War already at flood tide, the 
General Assembly voted to postpone its decision on a Charter 
Progress Toward a World of Peace With JusticetiGlobal Report Editor: Richard Hudson • 
ISSN0730-91 i 2 Publication Date: September 27,1993 
Copyright 1993, thb Center for War/Peace Studies, Inc., 218 East 18th 
Street, New York, N.Y. 10003. Tel: 212-475-1077 Fax: 212-260-6384. • 
Any opinions expressed in Global Report are those of the editor, and not 
necessarily those of anyone else associated with the Center for War/ 
Peace Studies, Inc. Global Report is published approximately quarterly, 
depending on events and on production of other CW/PS materials. 
Basic rate for supporters of the Center for War/Peace Studies is $35 per 
year and includes receipt of Global Report and, on request, any of the other 
CW/PS materials offered through Global Report. Students, senior citizens 
and Third World citizens may become supporters for $10 minimum per 
year. Subscription rate for libraries and other institutions that want to 
receive Global Report as well as other CW/PS materials is $20 per year. 
The Center for War/Peace Studies, Inc., is a non-profit New York corpo-
ration. Board of Directors: Harrison Hoffman, chairman; Oscar 
Israel, vice chairman; Mel Dubin, secretary; Richard Hudson, execu-
tive director, Michael Erlanger, Benjamin B. Ferencz, Myron Kronisch, 
Betty G. Lall, Miles Pennybacker, Joan Warburg, Hannah Wassermann. 
Contributions to the Center for War/Peace Studies, Inc., which are tax 
deductible, are welcomed. 
F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690422 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 3]
.c06690422FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690422 Date: 07/22/2021 
Global Report Fall 1993 No. 39 
Review Conference until the next year. In 1956, it postponed its 
decision again, and again in 1957, and again in 1958, and so on, 
until the whole matter was forgotten completely. 
Today, 38 years after the Framers of the U.N. Charter intend-
ed, the first major constitutional debate on the fundamental 
instrument of world rule of law has begun. The political forces 
for change in the planetary order have grown irresistible. The 
immediate trigger for change has corne in the growth in political 
power of Germany and Japan, and in the increasing demands on 
the U.N. for peacekeeping and peacemaking forces. These two 
countries must carry a lot of the financial freight for these new 
U.N. responsibilities, but they cannot be expected to do so if 
they are given a backseat in the Security Council deciskins that 
control these forces. 
The inevitability of the addition of Germany and Japan to the 
Security Council is made quite clear in U.N. General Assembly 
documents A/48/264, A/48/264/Add.1, and A/48/264/Add.2, 
dated respectively, July 20, July 26, and August 27, 1993, 
which contain replies to the U.N. Secretary-General on "The 
Question of Equitable Representation on the increase in the 
membership of the Security Council." The 1992 session of the 
General Assembly called upon member states to give their 
views on this question, and 69 of them did in these historic doc-
uments of.126 pages that raise the curtain on what could 
become, in my opinion, the Great Debate on the World • 
Constitution for the 21st Century. Although the replies are sup-
posed to confine themselves to changes in the Security Council, 
they have inevitably addressed issues throughout the U.N. sys-
tem, and particularly the relationship between the General 
Assembly and the Security Council. 
Thus, the proverbial "Pandora's box," otherwise known as ",a 
can of worms," has been opened up whether the member states 
like it or not, and some of them, particularly certain permanent 
members of the Security Council, definitely do not like it, 
although they do not say so too loudly in public. 
The situation is in some sense one of falling dominoes. The 
dominoes sure to fall are the admission of Germany and Japan 'to 
the Security Council, most likely as permanent members, but 
without veto power. The next few dominoes will be the admis-
sion of some middle powers of the Third World. Often mentioned 
are Brazil, Nigeria, and India. Other plans are floating in 
corridors to create something like regional, or semi-permanent 
members. Under these schemes, the three major non-European 
areas, Latin America, Africa and Asia might rotate one seat 
among the three groups for a number of years. The political 
imperative behind this set of dominoes is that to add only 
Germany and Japan as permanent members of the Security 
Council, when three of the five permanent representatives, Britain, 
France and Russia, are already European, would further distort 
decision-making influence in favor of the industrialized powers. 
This analysis brings the number of members on the new 
Security Council up to this minimum total: 15 as at present, plus 
Germany and Japan, plus as least one more permanent or rotat-
ing member from Latin America, Africa, and Asia, and more 
likely two such members. We are therefore talking about a mini-
mum expansion of the Security Council from 15 to 20 members. 
However, we have not looked at the rest of the dominoes. In 
the replies to the Secretary-General on expansion of the 
Security Council, there has been a vociferous outcry calling for 
a greater role for the General Assembly in intemational political 
affairs. Since the end of the Cold War in 1989, the Security 
Council has increasingly been meeting in the format of "consul-
tations," from which the 169 nations th9.t are not among "the 15 
members of the Security Council are barred. The call for "trans-. 
parency" recurs throughout the govemments' replies. In non 
diplomatic language, they want to know what the hell is going 
on behind those closed doors of the heavily-guarded Security 
Council chambers adjacent to the public meeting room of that 
body. There are many references to Article 24 of the U.N. 
Charter, which binds all members to obey Security Council 
decisions with this language: 
In order to ensure prompt and effective action by the United 
Nations, its Members confer on the Security council primary 
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and 
security, and agree that in carrying out its duties under this 
responsibility the Security Council acts on their behalf. 
Since they are indelibly bound by Security Council deci-
sions, many of the non-members are demanding, at the least, 
that the Council make quarterly reports to the General 
Assembly including not only resolutions passed, but also analy-, 
sis of the argumentation that lay behind them. However, the 
permanent members are jealous of their prerogatives, as wimess 
these comments from the five of theni: 
CHINA: "As the proposed restructuring of the Council has ‘a 
direct bearing on the interests of all States Members of the 
United Nations and may entail revision of the Charter, this 
probess will necessarily be a fairly long one involving compli-
cated political, legal and procedural issues. China maintains 
that any measure aimed at restructuring the Council should 
therefore be considered in a prudent and cautious manner." 
FRANCE: "While due in part to the new climate prevailing in 
international relations, the Council's effectiveness is also bound 
up with the fact that it has a limited number of members, which 
permits it to achieve compromise and reach decisions reflecting 
as often as not a consensus agreement within the United Nations 
as a whole. The 10 non-permanent members of the Council 
already ensure an equitable geographical representation of 
Member States, and they have contributed to the Council's pri-
mary role now at last restored to its original charter." • 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: "With the large nuMber of con-
flicts in the world and the involvement of the United Nations in 
their settlement, the Organization cannot afford to engage in an 
overhaul of machinery which not only is not broken but is in fact 
in good working order, with the risk of paralysis that that entails." 
UNITED KINGDOM: "Neither a protracted debate on 
enlargement, nor precipitate action, should be allowed to dimin-
ish the Council's effectiveness. The first priority must be to • 
safeguard the effective operation of the Council." 
UNITED STATES: "First, the current permanent members 
of the Council are countries with global political and economic 
influence and a capacity as well as a will to contribute to global 
peace and security through peace-keeping and other activities. 
Their status on the Council should remain unaltered. Second, 
the United States supports permanent membership for Japan 
and Germany as well, fully recognizing that permanent mem-
bership entails assuming an active role in global peace and 
security activities. We are also prepared to consider carefully 
how the Council might be further expanded to include a modest 
number of additional seats." 
Thus, the bottom line appears to be that the five permanent 
members recognize the' handwriting on the wall—the Council 
will be enlarged but they will try to limit any changes in the 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690422 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 9 0 4 2 2 ;SIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690422 Date: 07/22/2021 
Global Report Fall 1993 No. 39 
U.N. Charter solely to this one question, and they will reluctant-
ly accept only the minimum, and slowly, of an expansion of the 
Council. Most of the rest of the U.N. membership, judging by 
the replies received by the Secretary-General, have broader 
objectives in mind. 
In my view, it will be a tragedy of great historical dimensions 
if the 50th anniversary of the U.N. Charter results only in the 
enlargement of the Security Council. A bigger Council will not 
bring about the fundamental change in the international system 
that is so desperately needed. The whole system, as a system, 
must be examined, with particular emphasis on the relationship 
between the General Assembly and the Security Council. 
The central issue in this constitutional debate is exemplified 
in the strikingly contrasting replies of Finland and Chile to the 
Secretary-General: 
FINLAND: "It is, in the view of the Finnish government, 
important to treat a change of the Charter provisions governing 
the composition of the Security Council as a matter sui generis 
which should not be linked to other initiatives for amending the 
Charter or reforming the United Nations system." 
CHILE: "Chile also believes that the restructuring of the 
Security Council should constitute an integral part of a brodd 
and far-reaching process of reform of the United Nations sys-
tem which will enable the Organization fully to discharge the 
important work assigned to it by the Charter, work which has 
been thwarted in the past." 
One of the bluntest replies to the Secretary-General came 
from Yemen, which called for: 
Abolition of the veto system and adoption of another voting 
system based on democratic principles...and strengthening of 
the General Assembly so that its resolutions carry the same 
force and authority as those of the Security Council. 
At this point in the emerging dialogue, it is unclear whether 
the narrow or broad approach will prevail. I hope fervently;.Mr. 
President, you will choose the Iatter. This is a time in history 
not to be timid, but to move boldly toward a vision of global 
governance that will be able to address the myriad problems of 
our planet in an effective and equitable manner. 
WE'VE GOT MOMENTUM 
HELP US KEEP IT UP! 
[.] Yes, I want to help—here is my contribution. 
D Please send me "The Prospectus for the United Nations 
Countdown 2000 Project of the Center for War/Peace 
Studies: Program for Fiscal 1994-95-96." 
Thank you! 
D $35 0 $10 (seniors, students and Third World citizens) 
0 $50 0 $100 Ei Other 
Name 
Address 
City State Zip 
Coming in Next Issue 
Events in the arena of world order are moving at an 
astonishing rate. In the next issue we will report on these 
developments: 
• The Report of the U.S. Commission on Improving 
the Effectiveness of the United Nations, which has now 
been completed, 
• Progress of the Commission on Global Governance, 
which grew out of the Stockholm Initiative, 
• The initiative of the Center for War/Peace Studies 
urging the U.N. General Assembly to call upon the 
Secretary-General "to appoint an independent commis-
sion to study the question of whether various amend-
ments to the U.N. Charter could improve the functioning 
of the Organization, and to present its recommendations 
to the 49th session of the General Assembly." 
In closing, I would like to return to our Binding Triad pro-
posal for global decision-making. The world now has a political 
system with a capable executive department, headed by a savvy 
CEO; a judicial body, the International court of Justice; an 
enforcement arm, the growing body of U.N. peacekeepers and 
peacemakers. What the intemational system lacks is a legisla-
ture able to enact binding and enforceable laws. That is what 
the Binding Triad system would provide. It would not be easy 
to win the three majorities in the General Assembly based on 
one-nation-one-vote, population, and contributions to the U.N. 
budget; but once done—there would be no vetoes—the result 
would be a solid victory for intelligent compromise jn govern-
ing our embattled planet. 
Love, law and peace, 
CENTER FOR WAR/PEACE STUDIES 
218 E 18TH ST NY NY 10003 
Printed on recycled paper 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690422 Date: 07/22/2021