[Page 1]
C 0 66 9 0 6 9 37IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021 
KEYNOTE SPEECH OF JOHN V. WHITBECK RELEASE IN FULL 
ANNUAL NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF 
THE COUNCIL FOR THE NATIONAL INTEREST 
WASHINGTON GRAND HOTEL - OCTOBER 2, 1993 
It is a great pleasure for me, as perhaps the only CNI member in Paris, to have the 
opportunity to address all of you who have been working for a more just, ethical and balanced 
American Middle East policy, one which truly reflects the values and serves the interests of 
Americans, in the face of all the obstacles of which we are all aware. 
I azn particularly grateful to Gene Bird for giving me this opportunity at this most 
exciting time, when the essential moral, spiritual and psychological transformation toward a 
cooperative, rather than a confrontational, view of the future of Israel, Palestine and the Middle 
East as a whole appears, at long last, to be taking hold in hearts and minds and when anything, 
even the most seemingly utopian of visions, suddenly seems possible. 
My subject is such a vision - what- I call the "Two States, One Holy Land" framework 
for peace. I hope that many of you are familiar with it as a result of CNI's very kind decision to 
circulate its most recent publication, in the journal Middle East Policy under the title 
"Confederation Now", to CNI's membership. However, I don't expect anyone to remember the 
details and therefore propose, at the conclusion of my remarks, to read you the second half of 
that article, in which the framework is set forth. I understand that there will then be time for 
discussion and questions, which I will welcome. 
The "Two States, One Holy LazIcl" framework for peace was first published, by the Los 
Angeles Times, in January 1988, one mimth after the Intifada began. I believed then - and still 
.believe - that this framework or something closely resembling it is not only the best possible 
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian tragedy but the only solution which has a real chance of 
being acceptable both to most Israelis and to most Palestinians, as any lasting solution must be. 
I have never had any illusion that this framework for peace would be the first choice of 
either side. However, I believe that it could well be the second choice of both sides - that, if 
they thought seriously about it, both Israelis and Palestinians could recognize that a peace built 
on the basis of such a framework would be better for them than either the status quo or any 
other realistically realisable alternative. 
I have always recognized that I could well be naive and that I could even be wrong. But, 
believing as I do, I have felt morally obligated to do everything within my limited powers as a 
private citizen to convince people who count, on both sides, that this framework for peace 
really is the solution. 
The framework has now been published 19 times, including twice in the Israeli press 
and three times in the Palestinian press, as well as by the Israel/Palestine Center for Research 
and Information, the joint Israeli-Palestinian think tank in Jerusalem. In an effort to focus 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 0 6 9 3 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021 
attention on the framework, I have mailed thousands of copies to people who could count and 
have met on numerous occasions with prominent Palestinians, including President Arafat, as 
well as with Israeli peace activists, politicians and generals and even with American diplomats. 
In 1991, Paul Findley did me the honor of publishing an op-ed article about my 
framework. He concluded his article by quoting something I had written to him: "Realistically, 
the chances of a solution as reasonable as mine ever being adopted must be no better than one 
in 100. But, even if they were only one in 1,000, it would be unconscionable not to keep 
trying." I no longer consider the chances to be remote. After what has happened over the past 
month, and in particular after what happened here in Washington on September 13, I now 
believe that the chances are excellent. 
The concept of "confederation" is suddenly a subject of general interest on all sides. 
Shimon Peres sounded some distinctly confederationist notes in his speech on the White House 
lawn, though he shares the vision common among the more visionary of a three-state 
confederation among Israel, Jordan and Palestine. 
In July, Foreign Minister Peres wrote to me after receiving my Middle East Policy 
article, which he said he had read with "great interest" and politely (and, I hope, perceptively) 
characterized as "very thoughtful and well written". In this letter, he stated his view that "the 
confederation idea and concept seem to be a very viable framework for a lasting settlement in 
the region" and his hope that "a political confederation between Jordan and the Palestinians ... 
could lead to a tripartite economic confederation between Jordan, Israel and the Palestinians." 
Far more common, among both Israelis and Palestinians, is talk of a two-state 
confederation between Jordan and Palestine. I must confess to continuing confusion as to how 
focusing on a Jordanian-Palestinian confederation can ever help to produce a Palestinian state, 
since such a focus effectively ignores Israel and Israeli concerns (a certain recipe for failure) 
and addresses in no way (let alone way§ advantageous to both Israelis and Palestinians) the 
three principal problems on the road to peace - Jerusalem, settlers and borders. 
A "confederation" is, by definition, a relationship between independent sovereign states. 
The European Community is a confederation, while the so-called Swiss Confederation is 
actually a mischievously misnamed federation, with a single citizenship, a single sovereignty 
and a single international personality. A "confederation" is also an infinitely flexible 
relationship, one in which some elements of absolute sovereignty are pooled but which can be 
very close or very loose and which is specially tailored to fit the circumstances and the wishes 
of the states involved. 
It is clear that a substantial majority of Israelis still find an independent Palestinian state 
in all the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 (subject, perhaps, to joint sovereignty over 
an undivided Jerusalem) to be totally unacceptable. Why should they find such a state 
acceptable simply because it has some confederal relationship with Jordan - particularly since a 
confederation can always be dissolved or transformed into a federal state or even transformed 
into a unitary state? 
Indeed, why would Israelis concerned with security, if they thought seriously about the 
matter find the nrosnect of a large_ well-armed_ Palestinian-maioritv entitv (confederal today. UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 9 0 6 9 3 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021 
perhaps unitary tomorrow) more comforting than a tiny, demilitarized Palestinian state in the 
West 13ank and Gaza? Indeed, would the potential advantages of a two-state confederation of 
Jordan and Palestine for Jordan, and in particular for its Hashemite Monarchy, really outweigh 
the potential risks? 
In any event, it is the relationship between Israel and Palestine, not the relationship 
between Jordan and Palestine, which is, and has always been, the core of the "Middle East 
problem". While many no doubt share Shimon Peres' hope that an initial two-state 
confederation could eventually lead to a tripartite confederation among Israel, Palestine and 
Jordan, or even to some form of "Middle East Common Market", it should be clear that, in 
order for an independent Palestinian state to be acceptable to most Israelis, the initial 
confederation in a new, peaceful and cooperative Middle East must, logically, be an Israeli-
Palestinian one which addresses adequately Israeli fears and needs. 
King Hussein, a prudent monarch who seems less keen on confederation than many 
Israelis, Palestinians and Americans, recently stated that talk of an eventual Jordanian-
Palestinian confederation is premature and should await the existence of an independent 
Palestinian state in full control of its affairs. Yet such a state can never exist until the 
relationship between Israel and Palestine has been worked out in mutually advantageous ways 
that deal with the hard issues, notably Jerusalem, settlers and borders, on which formal 
negotiations must begin within the next two years. It is a vision of a cooperative relationship 
between Israeli and Palestinian states which deals in mutually advantageous ways with those 
hard issues which my framework for peace has sought to offer for the past six years. Perhaps 
its time has come. 
During the summer of 1989, while trying, with a notable lack of success, t6 promote my 
framework in Israel, I met with several retired generals at the Jaffee Center for Strategic 
Studies in Te1 Aviv. Near the end of the meeting, one of the generals, a former Chief of Israeli 
Military Intelligence, struck what seenid at the time a brutal verbal blow. He told me - and 
asked me to tell President Arafat, with whom I had met in Tunis a week earlier - that justice, 
morality, international law and international support were irrelevant, that Israel had all the 
territory and that it would keep it ... unless the Palestinians could seduce the Israelis into giving 
some of it back. 
I didn't pass this message on to President Arafat, but its brutal truth does seem to have 
registered with him, and I rejoice in the belief that the process of seducing the Israeli people 
into recognizing that it is in their own self-interest to accept Palestine's right to exist - and of 
seducing the American people into recognizing that Palestinians are human beings entitled to 
basic human rights - has well and truly begun and that, whatever breakdowns and detours there 
may be along the road, nothing can stop it now. 
I would like to close by reading to you the "Two States, One Holy Land" framework for 
peace: 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 9 0 6 9 3 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021 
MIDDLE EAST POLICY ( 
Sharing the Holy Land is not a zero-sum 
game in which any development advanta-
geous to one side must be disadvantageous 
to the other. One can envisage a society in 
which, by separating political and voting 
rights from economic, social and resislential 
rights in a negotiated settlement, both the 
legitimate national aspirations of Palestin-
ians and the legitimate security interests of 
Israelis could be simultaneously satisfied. 
The non-negotiable minirnum for . both 
Israelis and Palestinians is their own self-
determination as peoples and nations, that 
they can have a state of their own in the 
land that both love, including at least sorne 
share of Jerusalem, and that never again 
will anyone else govern them. This is 'lin 
impossible. The Holy Land could be a 
two-state "confederation," a single eco-
nomic and social unit- encompassing two 
sovereign states and one Holy City. Jerusa-
lem could form an undivided part of both 
states, be the capital of both states and be 
administered by an autonomous. elected 
municipal council. 
66 
All current residents of the Holy Land 
could be given the choice of Israeli or 
Palestinian citizenship, thus determining 
which state's passport they would carry 
and in which state's national elections they 
would vote. All citizens of either state 
could vote in municipal elections where 
they actually live, a matter of particular 
relevance to Israeli Arabs opting for Pales-
tinian citizenship and to Israeli settlers 
choosing to continue to live in Palestine. 
Each state could have its own "law of 
return" conferring citizenship and residen-
tial rights within that state on persons not 
currently resident in the Holy Land. 
Borders would have to be drawn on maps 
but would not have to exist on the ground. 
The free, non-discriminatory movement of 
people and products within the Holy Land 
could be a fundamental principle subject 
only to one major exception: to ensure that 
each state would always maintain its na-
tional character, the right to residence in 
each Holy Land state could be limited to 
that state's citizens, to citizens of the other 
state residing there on an agreed future date 
and to their descendants. (In this way, 
deeply felt principles could be maintained. 
Israelis could have the right to live in all of 
Eretz Israel—but not all Israelis in all of 
Eretz Israel. Similarly, Palestinians could 
have the right to live in all of historic 
Palestine—but not all Palestinians in all of 
historic Palestine.) A common currency 
(perhaps printed in Hebrew on one side and 
Arabic on the other and named the 
"Shalom/Salaam") could be issued by a 
common central bank. 
To ease Israeli security concerns, the 
Palestinian state -could be fully demilita-
rized. with only local police forces and 
U.N. peacekeeping forces allowed to bear 
arms and with Israeli listening posts al-
lowed to remain on Palestinian territory for 
a limited period but renamed "research 
facilities." staffed by civilians and not fly-
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 5]
C 0 6 6 9 0 6 9 3 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021 
WHITBECK: CONFEDERATION NOW 
ing the Israeli flag. As an essential counter-
part to the absence of border controls 
within the Holy Land, Israel could conduct 
its own immigration controls, at the same 
time that Palestine conducts its immigra-
tions controls, at the frontiers of the Pales-
tinian state with Egypt and Jordan, with 
any visitors restricted to the Palestinian 
state facing penalties if found in Israel. The 
settlement agreement could be guaranteed 
by the United Nations and relevant states, 
with international tribunals to arbitrate dis-
putes regarding compliance with its terms. 
The status of Jerusalem poses the tough-
est problem for any settlement plan. caus-
ing many to assume, for this reason alone, 
that no settlement acceptable to both sides 
can ever be reached. When the U.N. Gen-
eral Assembly adopted Resolution 181 in 
1947, it addressed the problem by suggest-
ing an international status for Jerusalem, 
with neither the Jewish nor the Arab state 
to have sovereignty over the city. Yet joint 
undivided sovereignty, while rare, is not 
without precedent. 
Chandigarh is the joint undivided capital 
of two Indian states. For more than 70 
years, the entire Pacific state of Vanuatu 
(formerly the New Hebrides) was under the 
jOint undivided sovereignty of Britain and 
France. For more than 700 years. the Prin-
cipality of Andorra has been under the joint 
undivided sovereignty of French and Span-
ish individuals (currently the president of 
the French Republic and the bishop of Seo 
de Urgel) while its administration is en-
trusted to an elected General Council. Until 
Gerrnan reunification, the western sectors 
of Berlin, under American, British and 
French sovereignty, were jointly adminis-
tered by an autonomous, elected Senate. 
As a joint capital, Jerusalem could have 
Israeli government offices principally in its 
western sector, Palestinian government of-
fices principally in its eastern sector and 
municipal offices in both. A system of dis-
67 
tricts or French-style arrondissements 
could bring municipal government closer to 
the different communities in the city. To 
the extent that either state wished to con-
trol persons or goods passing into it from 
the other state, this could be done at the 
points of exit from, rather than the points of 
entry to, Jerusalem. In a context of peace,. 
particularly one coupled with economic, 
union, the need for such controls would be 
minimal. 
In a sense, Jerusalem can be viewed as a 
cake which could be sliced either vertically 
or horizontally. Either way, the Palestin-, 
ians would get half the cake, but, while 
most Israelis could never voluntarily swal-
low a vertical slice, they might just be able 
to swallow a horizontal slice. (Indeed, by 
doing so,. Israel would finally achieve inter-
national recognition of Jerusalem as its cap-
ital.) Jerusalem is both a municipality on 
the ground and a symbol in hearts and 
minds. Undivided but shared in this way, 
Jerusalem could be a symbol of reconcilia-
tion and hope for Jews, Muslims, Chris-
tians and the world as a whole. 
Such a framework would address in ways 
advantageems to both sides the three prin-
cipal practical problems on the road to 
peace—Jerusalem (through joint sover-
eignty over an undivided city), settlers 
(through a separation of citizenship rights 
from residential rights in a regime of free 
access to the entire Holy Land for all 
citizens of both states under which no one 
would be compelled to move) and borders 
(through a structure of relations between 
the two states so open and nonthreatening 
that the precise placement of borders would 
no longer be such a contentious issue and 
the pre-I967 borders—subject only to the 
expanded borders of Jerusalem, under joint 
sovereignty—might well be acceptable to 
most Israelis, as they would certainly be to 
most Palestinians). 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 6]
C 0 66 90 6 9 3 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021 
MIDDLE EAST POLICY 
For Israelis, the threat of one day living 
in a state with a majority of Arab voters or 
an inescapable resemblance to pre-1990 
South Africa would be replaced by the 
assurance of living in a democratic state 
with fewer Arab voters than today. The 
Israelis' security would be enhanced by 
assuaging, rather than continuing to aggra-
vate, the Palestinians' grievances. By es-
caPing from the role (so tragic in light of 
Jewish history) of oppressors and enforcers 
of injustice, Israel would save its soul and 
its dreams. 
For all Palestinians, human dignity would 
be restored. They would cease to be a 
people treated (and not only by Israelis) as 
pariahs uniquely unworthy pf basic human 
rights. For those in exile, an internationally 
accepted Palestinian citizenship, a Palestin-
ian passport and a right to return, if only to 
visit, would have enormous significance. 
And if the Palestinians themselves accepted 
a settlement, few, if any, Arab states would 
continue to reject Israel, If a Palestinian 
flag were peacefully raised over Palestinian 
government offices in Jerusalem, few Arab 
eyes would still see Israel through a veil of 
hatred. The immovable obstacle to ajasting 
region-wide peace would have been re-
moved. 
While implementation of such a frame-
work for peace would be relatively simple, 
its acceptance would require a moral, spir-
itual and psychological transformation from 
both Israelis and Palestinians. Yet, given 
the decades of hatred, bitterness and dis-
trust, any settlement would require such a 
transformation. Precisely because such a 
transformation would be so difficult, it is 
far more likely to be achieved if both peo-
JOHN V. WHITBECK 
150, RUE DE L'UNIVERSITi 
75007 PARIS, FRANCE 
68 
ples can be inspired by a truly compelling 
vision of a new society of peaceful coexist-
ence, mutual respect and human dignity, in 
which both peoples are winners, than if 
they are left to contemplate painful pro-
grams for a new partition and an angry 
separation in which both peOples must re-
gard themselves, to a considerable degree, 
as admitting defeat. 
Israelis, Palestinians and the true friends 
of both must now raise their sights beyond 
mere "interim measures" and purstie a 
compelling vision of a society so much 
better than the status quo that both IsraeliS 
and Palestinians are inspired to accept in 
their hearts and minds that peace is both 
desirable and attainable, that the Holy 
Land can be shared, that a winner-take-all 
approach produces only losers, that both 
Israelis and Palestinians must be winners or 
both will continue to be losers and that 
there is a common destination at which 
both peoples would be satisfied to arrive 
and to live together. 
Given the huge imbalance between Israel 
and Palestine in terms of military strength 
and power politics, the immediate practical 
challenge for all who are seriously inter-
ested in peace must be to find a way to 
structure the Palestinian state and its rela-
tionship with Israel which, while meeting at 
least the minimum material and psycholog-
ical requirements of the Palestinians, still 
permits a majority of Israelis to perceive 
such a state, as so structured, as enhancing 
their security and the quality of their lives, 
so that they can recognize that it is in their 
own self-interest to accept Falestine's Tight 
to exist in peaceful coexistence with Israel. 
Peace is unimaginable on any other basis. 
Telephones: (331) 4555-0658 (h) 
(331) 4266-0319 (o) 
Telefax : (331) 4266-3591 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690693 Date: 07/22/2021