[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 1 0 431FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690104 Date: 06/16/2021 
UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION 
UNIDO  update  RELEASE IN FULL] 
v 92-56071 —Sepiember 1992-3 500 No. 22 
UNIDO AT EUROPE-MEDITERRANEAN FORUM ht Meh Thering• 
" Europe and thc Mediterranean in the 
Ne‘k World Situation" was the theme of 
a conference at Athens on 9-12 April 
organized by the rondcmon rlu roi um 
under the aegis of the Greek Govern-
ment 
lt provided one of the most pres-
tigious forums ever for a presentation of 
UNIDO, with the participation of 
political and economic leaders—includ-
ing 10 heads of State—from more than 
40 countries of the European Com-
munity and the Mediterranean and 
Black Sea regions 
Discussions concentrated on (he stra-
tegic difficulties anticipated in the 
Mediterranean Basin. Non-political is-
sues of crucial importance to the region 
were interwoven with the programme. 
with two of four thematic seminars 
organized and chaired by UNIDO 
Thc two sessions, chaired bv 
A Tcheknavorian-Asenbauer, Director 
of the Industrial Operations Technology 
Division, concluded with proposals to 
establish a "European Nemork for . 
Disaster Mitigation and Disaster Re-
covery" and a "Centre for En VI ronmem 
and Cleaner Technology for the Medi-
terranean and the Black Sea". Both 
ideas were well received by .participants 
and organizers alike. Initial discussions 
were held with the host Government 
indicating that the centre might be 
hosted by Greece 
In hts statement to the plenary 
session. "Towards world cooperation'', 
UNIDO Director-General Domingo 
L. Siazon, Jr stressed the need for 
international cooperation in the high-
priority programme areas discussed and 
pledged the support of the Organization 
towards the achievement of their objec-
tives. 
Issue papers especially prepared for 
"Disaster mitigation and . disaster the conference and other UNIDO ma: 
recovery". one session organized by terial were distributed at a stand 
Niels Biering. focused on the role of showing highlights of the activities of 
Governments and puhlic authorities in the Industrial Operations Technology 
countries affected by earthquakes in Division. 
minimizing the impact on lives and UNIDO's practical and down-to-
property and in facilitating efficient earth approach and concrete proposals 
post-disaster recovery programmes for cooperation achieved widespread 
Of particular interest to journalists recognition among European officials at 
and government ministers was the ses- the conference. 
sion on "Environment protection and Based in Crans-Montana. Switzer-
recycling of waste". Organized by John land, and created in 1989, Fondation du 
Oxley and B Sugavanam of UNIDO. it forum organizes exclusive symposia 
dealt with the promotion of cicaner aimed at international cooperation 
technologies and on the'replacement of through individual contacts between 
technologies and industrial products leading political and economic decision 
affecting the ozone layer. makers. 
•Mr. Biering is a Senior Industrial Develop-
ment Officer, Chemical Induciries Branch. 
industrial Operations Technology Division 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690104 Date: 06/16/2021