[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 6 91 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690691 Date: 07/22/2021 . 
Iteralb INTERNATIONAL Posb 
eribunt PUHI !SHED WITH THE NEW YORK TIMES AND THE WASHINGTON POST 
MONDAY, DECEMBER 13, 1993 
OPINION 
RELEASE IN FULL 
First a Momentous Israeli Withdrawal 
P ARIS — Israel is supposed to 
withdraw its army from the 
Gaza Strip and from Jericho this 
Monday. Despite intensified vio- 
lence in Gaza and in Israel, the 
Israeli government seems deter-
mined that its army will indeed go, 
although whether it will all go, or go 
on Monday, is not clear. 
Its departure inspires the fear 
and anger of the Jewish colonists in 
the occupied territories that Issael 
seized in the 1967 war. There are to 
be military arrangements to protect 
them, but they see it in their interest 
to provoke conflict with the Pales-
divans, a sentiment reciprocated by 
the Palestinians opposed to the 
Asafat-Peres peace agreement. 
The colonists' position clearly is 
untenable in the Iong run. Yet they 
and their supporters make up a pow-
erful minonty that could again be-
come a parliamentary majority —as 
it was during the years of Likud 
party power and the prime minister-
ships of Menachem Begin and Yitz-
hak Shamir. Prime Minister Yitzhak 
Rabin of the Labor Party operates 
on a narrow political margin. 
The past determination of Likud 
and of certain religious parties to 
install these colonies in territories 
legally under military occupation 
reflected their determination even-
tually to annex the territories in 
ordes to make — or, in their minds, 
restore — a Greater Israel. The con-
sequence is that Israel now has its 
own version of Britain's Northern 
Ireland problem. 
The govenunent is committed to 
leave these predominantly Arab ter-
ritories. but it is politically impossi-
ble for it to abandon the Jewish 
colonist& The problem is much 
smaller in scale and narrower in time 
than the problem of Noithern Ire-
land. The colonists are a few diou-
By William Pfaff 
sand in number and have been in the 
territories a decade or two rallies 
than the three centuries the Scottish 
and English Protestants have been in 
Ulster. But it is the same problem. 
The other problem, yet more 
emotional, is Jerusalem, a city of 
crucial religious and historical sit 
nificance for both Jews and Pales-
tinians. It is the only place claimed 
both by Israel and by the Palestin- 
ians. The latter otherwise claim sov-
ereign rights only over the lands 
conquered by Israel in 1967, and of 
those territories, the state of Israel 
asserts sovereignty only over ex-
panded East Jerusalem. 
A solution is possible here. It is 
joint, undMded Israeli and Pales-
tinian sovereignty over the city. 
This solution was proposed in the 
mid-I970s by John V. Whitbeck, an 
international laviyer. Mr. Whitbeck 
has indefatigably campaigned ever 
since to persuade both the Palestine 
Liberation Organization and the Is-
raeli government to consider his 
plan, and eventually he has suc-
ceeded in winning sympathetic at-
tention from both sides. 
He spoke about his plan at the 
National Press Club in Washington 
in October, and it was the subject of 
a conference in Cairo in November 
in which four members of the Knes-
set took part, three of them Labor, 
one of them the Knesset's majority 
leader, Elie Dayan. The Palestinians 
present included seven members of 
the pm= talks negotiating group. 
Mr. Whitbeck's conception is of 
an undMded Jerusalem as capital 
both of Israel and of a sovereign 
Palesdnian state, administered by 
an autonomous, elected municipal 
council. Its residents would carry 
the passport either of Israel or of 
Palestine, as they chose, and would 
vote in the national elections of the 
state to which thq had opted to 
belong. They would also vote in 
Jerusalem municipal elections. 
He envisages both haul and Pal- 
estinian government offices in the 
city. The plan is part of a larger 
proposal for the coecistence and 
roopaation of two sovereign states 
in the Holy Land, the Palestinian 
state demilitarized but internation-
ally guaranteed, making up a single 
economic community with Israel 
(and undoubtedly with Jordan). 
Mr. Whitbeck says he has "never 
had any illusion that this framework 
for peace would be the first choice of 
either side." However, he believes 
that "it could well be the second 
choice of both sides." 
If one assumes that no Israeli gov-
ernment could ever accept a redivi-
sion of Jerusalem, and that Palestin-
ians and indeed the Islamic world 
could never acknowledge permanent 
and total Israeli sovereignty over the 
Holy City, "then only one solution is 
conceivable: joint sovereignty over 
an undivided city." 
However, the Immediate issue for 
both Mr. Rabin and the PLO's lead-
'ersh~p is Israel's upcoming military 
withdrawal from the territorim and 
the transfer of Gaza and Jericho to 
secure Palestinian controL This has 
to be accomplished against the 111UP 
demus resistance of the Palestinian 
groups that rriect any compromise 
with Israel, as well as against roe will 
of the colonists in the territories and 
their allies. Only if this can be done 
successfully will the larger issues of 
sovereignty and cooperation be ad-
dressed. What happens this Monday 
and after is thus crucial. 
International Herald Tribune. 
Ci Los Angeles Times Syndicate: 
JOHN V. WHITBECK 
150, RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690691 Date: 07/22/2021