[Page 1]
LC06690910 U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690910 Date: 07/22/2021 
THE N W YORK TIMES  NATIONAL SUNDAY, JANUARY  2, 1994 
Clinton's Nemesis: Perennial Accuser 
Who Still Considers Himself a Friend 
RELEASE IN FULL 
By SARA RIMER 
SPPdaliotheNew York Th en 
, LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Jan. 1 — Clitfj 
Jackson was eating a tuna sandwich at I 
;the Kettle, a 24-hour restaurant here,
trying to explain what it was that led 
;him to spread stories damaging to his 
;fellow Arkansan and former Oxford 
.classmate, Bill Clinton. 
"It has nothing to do with sex," said 
-the man who had arranged for two; 
state troopers to make accusations in a'l 
.national publication that they had set; 
up sexual liaisons for Mr. Chnton while 
-he was Governor of Arkansas. Rather, 
Mr. Jackson said, "sex is a symptom of 
the basic Bill Clinton — the deception, 
manipulation and exploitation of peo-
ple.' 
Even as he sniped at the President, 
Mr. Jackson insisted that he consid-1 
ered himself a friend — "a better, 
friend than James Cat-ville, Bruce; 
Lindsey, Mack McLarty, Frank Greer, 
and all his other handlers." 
Castigating and Apologizing 
It seemed a slightly incongruous as-
union, since this friend wrote Mr. 
Cllnton a two-page letter this week, 
castigating the President tor "your 
casual willingness to deceive, to ex-
ploit, and to manipulate in order to 
attain personal and political power," 
and then apologizing for "inflictini 
such public pain upon you and yours.' 
Before senchng the letter, Mr. Jackson, 
first provided it to the corps of report- winStewart for The York ri 
ers from around the counny camped at Cliff Jackson the Capital Hotel here. 
Mr. Jackson said it was not true, as 
some of the President's top aides Nivel 
suggested, that he was pursuing a ven-
detta, or that he was obsessed with Mr. 
Chnton. Why, he said, he has hardly; 
thought about Mr. Clinton since the; 
1992 election, at least not until fairly 
recently. 
Then he pulled from his briefcase a 
24-year-old letter, still in its light blue 
envelope with a British postmark, that 
he said was written to him by an Amer-
ican woman who knew both him and 
Mr. Clinton at Oxford. In it, the woman 
addressed what were, even back then, 
Mr. Jackson's concerns about Mr. Clin-
ton's character. 
He read aloud: "Maybe he is indeed 
a 'politico' — surely it's something that 
he must needs ponder about. Yet, to be.
a friend is to care for people despite 
their fauhs.l trust your friendship with 
Bill won't be affected by a realistic look 
at a possible flaw of his. Yet this won't; 
help the resolution of the problem for,
Cliff Jackson himself — you must fight 
it out for yourself." 
That Mr. Jackson, a lawyer here. 
would keep that letter, carry it in his 
briefcase and read it to all the journal-
ists who have come to Little Rock to 
ook into the troopers' accusations, has 
disclosed more about Cliff Jackson 
than n has about Bill Clinton. 
Mr. Jackson, who says he once 
dreamed of becoming a writer, likes to 
quote William Faulkner, and in inter-
views and public appearances over the 
past week, it has seemed that his moti-
vations are. more the stuff of literature 
than politics. 
Vastly Different Paths 
This story begins in rural southwest.
Arkansas, in small towns 20 miles.
apart, where two young men rose from 
humble origins, one to become the 
President, the other, after an unsuc-
cessful campaign tor local office, to 
settle into a law practice so lucrative 
that, at age 47, he is semiretired. One 
man is outgoing and daulingly charis-
matic, the other a loner given to brood-
ing, and they might never have met 
had they not been the only two Arkan- 
sans at Oxford University 25 years ago, 
one a Rhodes Scholar, the other a Ful-
bright Scholar. 
Somewhere along the way, the loner, 
-Mr. Jackson, become the nemesis of 
the politician, Mr. Clinton, repeatedly 
telling tales to the press that could 
harm the candidate, then the Presi-
dent. 
During the 1992 campaign, in inter-
views with Larry King and with report-
,ers from the Cable News Network, Mr. 
-Jackson cited letters he wrote in col-
lege about his efforts to help Mr. 
ton obtain an Reserve Officer Training,. 
Corps determent, and his feeling that 
Mr. Clinton had betrayed him by using 
!him to avoid the draft. Mr. Jackson's 
'account helped lead to the public 
knowledge t.hat Mr. Clinton received a 
draft notice in 1969 and that efforts 
-were made on his behalf to avoid induc-
lion into the military. 
'The Most Media Savvy Person 
Mr. Jackson said the recent flurry of 
negative reports began when the two 
state troopers approached him last 
summer through their lawyer, Lynn.
Davis, whose unsuccessful Republican 
campaign for Arkansas -Secretary ot 
State Mr. Jackson ran in - 1968. Mr. 
Jackson informed The Los Angeles 
Times and then, as a backup should 
that newspaper not publish the report. 
The American Spectator, a conserva• 
tive magazine. He also arranged inter-
views with the troopers for CNN and 
the leading local newspaper, The Ar-
kansas Democrat-Gazette. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690910 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C06690910 ,SSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690910 Date: 07/22/2021 
Rex Nelson, the political editor of 
!The Gazette, said, "Cliff is the most 
media savvy person not to be in the 
!media I've ever been around." 
' What remains unclear is why Mr. 
:Jackson does this, and as the latest 
. chapter has been unfolding, even some 
'of his oldest friends have been specu-
lating about his motives. They wonder 
, aloud whether Mr. Jackson is motivat-
ed by religious fervor, or jealousy, or 
,anger over some long ago slight. He 
was reared in an Assemblies of Gad 
'family and still attends that church, 
, although he says he is "struggling with 
:my faith," 
A friend from childhood, who would 
.speak only on the condition of not being 
• identified, said that while both Mr. Clin-
ton and Mr. Jackson .started with re-
markable intellects and drives to suc-
ceed, Mr. Jackson might be envious of 
the Clinton quality that Mr. Jackson 
lacks: telegenic charm. 
'He Would Charm You' 
Mr. Jackson, a tall, thin man with 
receding blond-hair, raised the charm• 
factor at lunch, casting it as another of 
Mr. Clinton's character flaws. "He is 
very, very good at appearing sincere," 
Mr. Jackson said. "I'm telling you, he 
would charm you." 
He looked at the reporter across the 
table. "Do I charm your he asked, 
"No, I'm interesting. There's an inten-
sity about me, and a conviction." 
Mr. Jackson made a point of saying 
that his childhood, in Antioch, had been 
far more deprived than Mr. Clinton's, 
in Hope. His parents were subsistence 
farmers; his mother had polio. Cliff 
and his brother, Fred, a year younger, 
grew up in a shack that Iacked indoor 
plumbing. Cliff lost ,himself in books 
from an early age. 
"Around the eighth and ninth grades, 
I started reading Jack London," Mr. 
Jackson said. "His background was 
similar to mine. He believed in the 
working man." 
Mr. Jackson choked up and could not 
go on. "I'm sorry," he said. "I'm not an 
overtly emotional person." 
Then he continued: "Jack London 
had a vision of himself as if he were in 
a pit, and the only way out was to pull 
himself out on a ladder, rung by rung. 1 
J r. f 
' 
... .Z ¶," " 
. , • 
;just id,entified with that." His eyes-rid. ;weekly. "It was just acknowledged that• 
,dened again. 
Searching for an Answer 
Mr. Clinton's top aides have been 
quoted as saying that the two men were 
never more than distant friends who 
happened to play on the same basket-
ball team at Oxford. 
Mr. Jackson, who voted for George 
Bush in the 1992 Presidential election 
and said he had never voted for Mr. 
Clinton in the latter's races for office in 
Arkansas, seems to still be sorting out 
Damaging 
accounts about 
the President, but 
unclear motives. 
his feelings for Mr. Clinton. Askecrif he 
liked Mr. Clinton at Oxford, he said: 
"How do I answer that? You can like a 
person, and dislike things about them. 
There were always things about Bill 
Clinton I liked." 
Moments later he added! "He spent 
a great deal of time politicking,' glad-
handing other Rhodeses and Ful-
brights. It was clear to me that he was 
lining them up for future use. I thought 
then that he would be President some-
day. He had, and has, a drive to power 
unsurpassed by any individual I've 
ever seen." 
Mr. Jackson, president of the student 
body at Arkansas College, a small 
Presbyterian institution, once had po-
litical aspirations of his own. But he 
lost a bid for local prosecuting attorney-
in 1976 and has never again .run for' 
anything. That same year Mr. Clinton_ 
won his first state office, Attorney Gen-
eral. 
As a political reporter for what was• then The Arkansas Gazette, Ernest Du-! mas studied both men. "All eyes were! on Clinton," said Mr. Dumas, now a; columnist for The Arkansas Times, a' 
Ihe could be the next governor, or U.S. 
Senator if he wanted. Cliff's career 
;went into eclipse. No one was watching: 
!Cliff." ,) 
That is, not until the 1992 Presiden-i 
itial campaign, when Mr. Jackson went' 
to the news media with his first batch! 
t:if old letters. "The theory I've had is' . 
that Cliff is kind of envious," Mr. Du•-i 
mas said. "Clinton's always been the; 
center of attention, almost from the 
moment he was born. Everyone re- • 
members the first time they laid eyes:
on Bill Clinton, the first time they met 
'Bill Clinton. lt's not that way with 
• Cliff." 
, Mr. Jackson's brother, a rnanager 
with the Arkansas Employment Sem: 
•rity Department, said he thought his 
brother wa only adhering to the values 
with which they were reared. "My' 
mother," Fred Jackson said, "used to: 
tell us, 'Tell the truth if it takes the hair 
out of your head.' She said that to us a:-
million times." 
'What Am I Doing' 
1 At times over the past week, iJackson has himself seemed mystified.,'Bill Clinton didn't steal a girl," he Isaid over lunch, referrmg to the gossip. "I•le didn't sleep with my wife." 
i Later he declared: "Bill Clinton is 
the last person I'd be jealous of.'1 feel 
sorry for Bill Clinton." 
Then he was asked why he had taken !to the public accusations that could 
!only play into the hands of Mr. Chit-; ton's political enemies? 
"What am I doing?" Mr. Jackson 
asked aloud. "What am I doing?" He 
laughed sheepishly. "The only answer 
is I'm doing what is right." 
It has not, apparently, made for tha 
smoothest of holiday seasons for Mr...
Jackson, who is married and has two: 
daughters, 9 and 20 years old.
"My wife doesn't understand my mo-
tivation," he said. "She said, 'Why do 
you have to do this?' 
"I said, 'Gayle, because I have to.' 
It's not something I even want to do." 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690910 Date: 07/22/2021