[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 6 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698066 Date: 07/25/2019 
Sunday, October 22, 1995 
MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT 
From: Warren Christopher 
Subject: Your meeting with Boris Yeltsin (II) RELEASE IN FULL 
Strobe and I had dinner with a subdued, even shaken Andrey Kozyrev last night. 
In addition to confirming that he is all but finished as Foreign Minister, the session gave 
us additional insights into the challenge facing you tomorrow when you meet with 
Yeltsin. 
Kozyrev affirmed what we have sensed for more than a year: Yeltsin has come 
increasingly under the sway of hardliners within his own entourage. These are people 
whose thinking and orientation Kozyrev characterizes as "decades, if not centuries in the 
past." They are encouraging Yeltsin to see American and Western policy as motivated by 
"forces of darkness." Since this view is ascendant in the Parliament and on the hustings, 
Yeltsin is getting it from both sides -- from cronies and enemies alike. 
Kozyrev portrayed himself as a voice in the wilderness. He said he was tired of 
being the only one of Yeltsin's advisers to interpret Western actions in other than sinister 
terms and to cOunsel accommodation with the West on CFE, NATO expansion and other 
contentious issues. Even making allowances for the self-pitying and self-serving 
character of,what Kozyrev had to say, it rings true, given everything else we're hearing 
and seeing. 
The only consoling point iri an otherwise bleak presentation was Kozyrev's 
insistence that Yeltsin himself is still undecided and even inclined in the right direction. 
He has not been totally captured by the hardliners. Yeltsin is also, says Kozyrev, still 
deeply committed to his relationship with you and to the idea of "partnership," however 
battered it may be. His instinct is to trust you and to try to work out problems directly 
with you. 
Tomorrow that will mean trying to persuade you to support him on a variety of 
dubious if not totally unacceptable proposals: a Moscow meeting of the three former 
Yugoslav presidents on October 30 (logistically a near-impossibility, 
politically/diplomatically dangerous); a Russian contingent, not under NATO's "aegis," 
in a separate sector of Bosnia; more leniency in CFE (a recipe for paralysis of the 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698066 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 8 0 6 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698066 Date: 07/25/2019 
operation and friction between Russia and NATO on the ground); a postponement of 
NATO enlargement (a reprise of the non-starter he triect on you in May); a "European 
Security Council" (a Russia-sponsored, Russia-friendly substitute for NATO). His 
overall argument is likely to be: "Give me ammunition to refute the pessimists and defeat 
my opponents back home; prove that you and the West are not trying to weaken and 
huMiliate Russia but are prepared to meet us halfway." 
Your approach, I would suggest, should be to tell him you will work through all 
the specific issues on the agenda, but first you want to persuade him of several 
fundamentals. First: Russia -- and Yeltsin -- have a strategic choice to make between 
integration and isolation. The U.S. -- and you -- have already made a strategic choice in 
favor of doing all we can to support Russia's integration. More immediately, he should 
understand, and accept, a positive vision of the relationship and reject the paranoid 
analysis and confrontational advice he is getting in Moscow. While many of his specific 
proposals simply won't work for us, you and he should continue to work the problems, 
manage the differences and not proclaim -- or let others proclaim -- a new cold war. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698066 Date: 07/25/2019