[Page 1]
CO 6 6 90 6.9 9 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690699 Date: 07/22/2021 
"Two States, One Holy Land"/"Two Capitals, One Holy Citv" 
Remarks of John V. Whitbeck 
National Press Club, October 1, 1993 
RELEASE IN FULL 
There will never be a durable peace in the Middle East without a settlement of the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict acceptable both to most Israelis and to most Palestinians. That 
is a fact. 
There will also never be a lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict 
without a solution .to the status of Jerusalem acceptable both to most Israelis and to most 
Palestinians. That is also a fact. 
While it is widely assumed that no such solution exists - and that the status of 
Jerusalem should therefore not even be discussed until all the lesser problems of Israeli-
Palestinian relations have been resolved - there is one - and only one - solution which has a 
real chance of being acceptable both to most Israelis and to most Palestinians. 
Nothing is more likely to sustain (indeed, to accelerate) the current momentum 
toward peace and the essential moral, spiritual and psychblogical transformation toward a 
cooperative, rather than a confrontational, view of the future of the Middle East than a 
prompt recognition that a solution to the status of Jerusalem does exist. 
When Israelis and Palestinians speak about Jerusalem, they are not simply laying out 
negotiating positions. Jerusalem haš too tight a grip on hearts and minds. Their oft-
repeated and virtually unanimous positions must be taken seriously. If one accepts, as one 
must, that no Israeli government could ever accept a redivision of Jerusalem, and if one 
accepts, as one must, that no Palestinian leadership could ever accept a definitive 
settlement which gave the Palestinian State (and, indeed, the Arab and Islamic worlds) no 
share of sovereignty in Jerusalem, then only one solution is conceivable - joint sovereignty 
over an undivided city. 
In the context of a two-state solution, Jerusalem could form an undivided part of 
both states, be the capital of both states and be administered by an autonomous, elected 
municipal council. 
Joint undivided sovereignty over Jerusalem is the comerstone on which I have built 
my "Two States, One Holy Land" framework for peace, first published by the Los Angeles 
Times in January 1988, one month after the intifada began, and now published 19 times, 
including twice in the Israeli press and three times in the Palestinian press. 
The four paragraphs .of the framework devoted to Jerusalem, as published in June 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departrnent of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690699 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 0 6 9 9 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690699 Date: 07/22/2021 
QUOTE The status of Jerusalem poses the tough-
est problem for any settlement plan, caus-
ing many to assume, for this reason alone, 
that no settlement acceptable to both sides 
can ever be reached. When the U.N. Gen-
eral Aisembly adopted Resolution 181 in 
1947, it addressed the problem by suggest-
ing an international status for Jerusalem, 
with neither the Jewish nor the Arab state 
to have sovereignty over the city. Yet joint 
undivided sovereignty, while rare, is not 
without precedent. 
Chandigarh is the joint undivided capital 
of two Indian states. For more than 70 
years, the entire Pacific state of Vanuatu 
(formerly the New Hebrides) was under the 
joint undivided sovereignty of Britain and 
France. For more than 700 years, the Prin-
cipality of Andorra has been under the joint 
undivided sovereignty of French and Span-
ish individuals (currently the president of 
the French Republic and the bishop of Seo 
de Urgel) while its ..administration is en-
trusted to an elected General Council. Until 
German reunification, the western sectors 
of Berlin, under American, British and 
French sovereignty, were jointly adminis-
tered by an autonomous, elected Senate. 
As a joint capital. Jerusalem could have 
Israeli government offices principally in its 
western sector, Palestinian government of-
fices principally in its eastern sector and 
municipal offices in both. A system of dis-
UNQUOTE 
tricts or French-style arrondissements 
could bring municipal government closer to 
the different communities in the city. To 
the extent .that either state wished to con-
trol persons or goods passing into it from 
the other state, this could be done at the 
points of exit from, rather than the points of 
entry to, Jerusalem. In a context of peace, 
particularly one coupled with econoinic 
union, the need for such controls would be 
minimal. 
In a sense, Jerusalem can be viewed as a 
cake which could be sliced either vertically 
or horizontally. Either way, the Palestin-
ians would get half the cake, but, while 
most Israelis could never voluntarily swal-
low a vertical slice, they might just be able 
to swallow a horizontal slice. (Indeed, by 
doing so, Israel would finally achieve inter-
national recognition ofJerusalem as its cap-
ital.) Jerusalem is both a municipality on 
the ground and a symbol in hearts and 
minds. Undivided but shared in tliis way, 
Jerusalem could be a symbol of reconcilia-
tion and hope for Jews, Muslims, Chris-
tians and the world as a whole. 
The current "peace process", even after the earthquake on the White House lawn, is 
structured on the basis of dealing first with the relatively easy issues and saving the hard 
issues for last. This is not surprising, yet there is a serious risk that when all the minor 
puzzle pieces have been cut, there will be no way to fit the most important piece into the 
puzzle - and everything will fall apart. 
By contrast, my framework for peace has been constructed by seeking a solution 
first to the toughest problem, Jerusalem, then seeking solutions to the other tough 
problems, settlers, borders and refugees, in the context of the Jerusalem solution and 
finally seeking solutions to the lesser problems in the context of all that has gone before. 
I believe that, constructed in this way, all the pieces of the puzzle fit. It is a vision of 
a cooperative relationship between Israeli and Palestinian states which deals in mutually 
advantageous ways with the hard problems, particularly Jerusalem, which my framework 
for peace has sought to offer for the past six years. Perhaps its time has come. 
The road to peace starts in Jerusalem. The time to think and talk about Jerusalem is 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690699 Date: 07/22/2021