[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 8 717 7 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021 
WORLD FEDERALIST ASSOCIATION, VIRGINIA CHAPTER SPRING 1993 
RELEASE IN FULL 
ocir g-Oat: Constittitionat aOhärity for th“IniiedNatitins - 
• • 
DOOR OPENS TO UNITED N 
ODF Offers Five Proposals 
The U.N. Fiftieth Anniversary is certain to be marked by 
memorable celebrations in San Francisco and worldwide in 
1995. But this historic event should have much more than 
symbolic significance. The Parliamentarians for Global 
Action and the signers of the Stockholm Inititative as well are 
seriously considering the potential of a 1995 San Francisco 
Charter Review Conference. 
WFA also now faces this  
urgent moment in history. 
• The most immediate 
opportunity for federalists is 
to make Charter Review the 
focal point, as originally 
planned, of the Global 
Structures III Convocation to 
be held in 1994. Key signers 
of the Stockholm Initiative 
should be invited as speakers: 
e.g., Gro Harlem Brundtland, 
Vaclav Havel, Robert McNamara, Francois Mitterand, 
Eduard Shevardnadze, Cyrus Vance, Jimmy Carter. Also 
Albert Gore, Warren Christopher and Strobe Talbott should 
be invited. 
Including any of such speakers would ensure large, 
enthusiastic audiences. Mrs. Brundtland attracted a 3000+ 
audience when she spoke here in 1989. Speakers should agree 
to address some major aspect of Charter revision. Mrs. 
Brundtland, for example, could speak on the need for federal 
See Proposals, p. 2 
TIONS CHARTER REVISION 
Global Structures Convocation Must Lead 
With the UN 50th Anniversary in 1995, WFA must not miss 
the opportunity afforded -by the 1994 Global Structures 
Convocation. At this Convocation, methods for achieving 
Charter Revision should predominate. 
Human Rights is of great 
"We can no longer pretend that we don't know what needs to 
be done. How long will it be until a president, prime 
minister, or secretary-general calls for a Conference to Reform 
the United Nations . . . and invites all nations to send 
'delegates? Here is an opportunity for statesmanship and fame 
of the highest order. Let us seize this history-making 
opportunity and accept the challenge to create a more peaceful 
world." - Benjamin Ferencz and Ken Keyes, Planethood. 
U.S. Commission Nears Final Hearings 
- 16-member U.S. Commission on Improving the 
Effectiveness of the United Nations has now held five public 
hearings around the country: in Philadelphis, Los Angeles, 
San Francisco, Atlanta, and Chicago. 
The sixth and final hearing will be held in May with UN 
officials in New York. Following this meeting, the 
Commission will hold its own session in June for deliberating 
on a11 of the proceedings and for deciding on 
recommendations. 
A summary report from the Commission is scheduled for 
September, and our readers will be advised when this report is 
made available. • 
"If the U.N. is to have a future, it must assume some of 
the attributes of a state. It must have the right, the 
power and the means to keep the peace." 
- Former U.N. Sec.-Gen. U Thant 
concern worldwide, but its 
implementation requires 
enforceable world law, not 
mere talk; and this requires 
U.N. reform and restructure. 
The subject of Human Rights 
should therefore be 
subordinate to the central 
issue at the Convocation. 
Making 1995 fulfill its 
enormous potential will 
require long, careful 
preparation at many levels. 
U.N. member nations - 
especially the U.S. as a 
recognized leader - should all be involved, along with every 
NGO. World federalists must help preparations by securing 
media cooperation to raise public awareness to the benefits 
that can be derived from a federated world government. - 
Because the consequences of the 1995 events in San Francisco 
are of such moment, ODF is for this issue suspending our 
policy of keeping editorial commentary off the front page, in 
order to make a direct plea to the WFA Board. We are 
offering a resolution in this issue (p. 3) urging WFA to focus 
Global Structures HI on our main objective: the attainment of 
a workable United Nations. An opportunity such as 1995 
presents will not soon return. 
Every article in this issue deals with an idea which we hope 
will make 1995 a year of substantial progress toward a UN 
World Federation. • 
"I truly believe that historians of the future will look back 
upon this last decade of the 20th century as the key turn-
ing point when the world conceived of itself for the first 
time as a truly global civilization." - Sen. Albert Gore, 1992 
Index Page 
Proposals .   1 
Convocation   1 
US Commission   1 
_Questions to Ponder   2 
Resolution   3 
Editorials   4,5 
Town Hall   6 Calendar   8 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
CO 6 68 717 7,IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021 
J 
Page 2 THE OLD-DOMINION FEDERALIST SPRING 1993 ' 
FromProposals, p. 1 
world government as she has previously done: 
We need tO develop an international public sector. 
We need global government, nothing less. 
• The UN Secretary General should be asked to consider 
Charter review with a committee of experts and with them to 
prepare a proposal to submit to the Charter Review 
Conference in San Francisco. 
• The proposed Independent Commission for Strengthening 
the United Nations (ICSUN), representing the world's major 
geographic areas, should study the Charter to identify needs 
for revision, and report their findings to the UN Charter 
Review Conference. 
• Another approach, which should be taken without delay, 
would be a request to the U.S. Commission on Strengthening 
the Effectiveness of the United Nations to make suggestions 
for nominations to the UN Secretary General for a committee 
of experts to review the Charter. 
• President Clinton should promptly invite leaders of all the 
UN member nations to convene in sustained session, possibly 
in San Francisco prior to the 1995 conference, for the express 
purpose of: (1) drafting amendments to the present Charter or, 
if this proves unfeasible, (2) drafting a revised Charter that 
would give the *United Nations the structural backbone 
needed for world leadership. 
We would not expect all member nations to accept this 
invitation to send leaders or their delegates to San Francisco. 
However, the required majority could, with the help of the 
experts already involved, transform the Charter into a 
Constitution. The media would then give such worldwide 
response that other nations would be likely to ratify later. 
For the request to be credible to President Clinton, sufficient 
groundwork would need to be done early. Letter writing, 
media interviews, talks to other NGO's, and conference calls - 
all of these, would help arouse broad public awareness. ■ 
"Whatever you do, or dream you can, begin it. Boldness 
has genius, power and magic in it. Begin it now." 
- Goethe 
Words of Wisdom 
"Unfortunately, most of the international legal and 
institutional proposals receiving serious consideration . . . 
involve mere tinkerings with the existing system rather 
than a fundamental overhaul." - Worldwatch Institute 
"We are now moving into a chapter of human history in 
which our choice is going to be . . . between one world and 
no world. . . . I believe in the imminence of one world: 
human life is going to be a unity again in all its aspects and 
activities . . . sectarianism subordinated to ecumenicalism . 
.. nationalism to world government." - Arnold Toynbee 
"The plot thickens fast. A few short weeks will determine 
the political fate of America for the present generation and 
probably produce no small influence on the happhiess of 
society through a long succession of ages to come. Should 
everything proceed with harmony and consent according 
to our actual wishes and expectations, I will confess to you 
sincerely, my dear Marquis, it will be so much beyond 
anything we had a right to imagine or expect eighteen 
months ago, that it will demonstrate as visibly the finger of 
Providence, as any possible event in the course of human 
affairs can ever designate it." - George Washington 
to the Marquis de Layfayette, May 28, 1788. 
"Will allegiance to the fatal ideal of national sovereignty 
be transferred to the ideal of world government in time 
to save mankind fom self-destruction?" - Arnold Toynbee 
Toward World Government: Questions to Ponder and Discuss 
► ff a committee of experts, representative of the major geographic areas of the world, is selected for Charter 
revision, whom would you recommend? Who should make the selection? 
► What is the difference between "international" and "global" thinking? How can public awareness of this 
difference be achieved? 
I. What branches should be included in the World Court — Human Rights, Criminal, Environmental . . . ? What 
sub-divisions would be needed — Regional, Appeals, District . . . ? 
o. To avoid escalation into global crises, how should more international problems be handled? 
P. How can the strong energy of "national interests" be harnessed into concepts of world interdependence? 
b. What part should multinational corporations play in a United Nations World Federation? 
p- What final input should be given to the U.S. Commission on Strengthening the Effectiveness of the United 
Nations? 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 8 717 7 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021 
SPRING 1993 THE OLD-DOMINION FEDERALIST Page 3 
"I am hoping that the Federalists will be giving 
increased emphasis to the specifics of restructuring and 
strengthening the United Nations Charter -- a truly 
inspiring project when we take into account . . . the 
great gains to be derived that can't be obtained through 
small steps." - Stanky Platt, 1991 
"The task is Herculean! Let us hope that the time has 
arrived when wisdom, experience and common sense 
will prevail over habit and fear -- a time when, through 
the cooperation of many, people-power will become 
sufficiently aroused and effective to save the world 
from continued folly, enabling the people to reap the 
rich rewards of peace and disarmament." 
- Sunky Platt, 1992 
Resolution 
n erea6: 
1. The possibility of an official UN Review Conference in 1995 
offers unique opportunity; 
2. For such a Conference to take place and to be successful, 
adequate preparations by many NGOs, and the. U.S. 
government as a world leader, must be made in advance; 
3. Since a strengthened and restructured UN is WFA's primary 
goal, it is clearly our responsibility to assist in these 
preparations with all means available to us; 
4. The Global Structures Convocation III, scheduled for January 
1994, comes at precisely the right time -- such as may not 
appear again for decades -- for WF A , as the initiating sponsor, 
to make an enormous contribution; 
3liere/orel le it re3otecl: 
1. That the major emphasis of the Global Structures 
Convocation III be to develop public understanding of the 
need to restructure and strengthen the United Nations and, 
for this reason, to focus attention on the need for UN Charter 
revision; 
2. That WFA establish a strongly focused Planning Committee 
to advance this objective. 
"President Eisenhower said: 'People want peace so much 
that one of these days governments had better get out of 
the way and let them have it.' That time has arrived. 
Peace and other benefits can be gained through an official 
U.N. Charter Review Conference in 1995, the 50th 
Anniversary of the United Nations. 
"The impetus for such a Conference can result from 
'People Power,' cooperation among many citizen groups . 
.. plus leadership in government. This is a challenge to 
abandon folly and to make a real change, a great advance 
in civilization and in the quality of life." 
- Stanley Platt, 1992 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 8 717 7 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021 
Page 4 THE OLD-DOMINION FEDERALIST SPRING 1993 
Editorials 
World Grapples with Outdated Charter 
During last month's Congressional hearings on the sharp 
criticism made against the United Nations, former Under 
Sec.-Gen. Dick Thornburgh rightfully denounced the waste of 
time and materials on outmoded technology, plus voluminous 
unnecessary publications. There was general agreement that if 
we didn't have the UN we'd have to invent it, but that there 
is urgent need for "UN reform and restructure." The 
Secretariat, however, was the chief target: it must be 
drastically modernized. Sen. Kassebaum referred to the 
"inefficiency and lack of coordination of a bloated UN 
bureaucracy." 
Much of the criticism was sound, but some credit should live 
been given the United Nations for its many accomplishments: 
e.g., the world conferences which have educated and 
influenced millions of people and led many to public action. 
Nevertheless, the main problem was sadly overlooked: no 
matter how much conservation nor how many technological 
advances are made, the UN itself would still need more 
reform and restructure to meet the needs of today's world. 
One senator raised the question "Since the United Nations 
must be made more effective, what about the Charter?" 
There was a long pause at this, while even the walls seemed to 
ponder the question. Then, apparently considered entirely 
irrelevant, the matter was abruptly dropped. After 
weren't the speakers all employees of a nation whose 
"sovereignty" is guaranteed by the existent Charter? We 
quote: 
The Organization is based on the principle of the 
sovereign equality of all its Members. 
- UN Charter, Chap. 1, Art. 2.1. 
The Organization shall ensure that states which 
are not members of the United Nations . . . 
Mid, Art. 2.6. 
The people of today expect the United Nations to show 
leadership. On a CNN newscast after the Senate hearings, 
several speakers -- not government employees, these --
remarked that the UN lacks the enforcement power it needs 
today. One speaker volunteered that most people in the 
world wish the UN could work "like a government." 
Another said that most countries today, other than the U.S., 
would agree. "Most people" and "most countries" today! 
Then why the delay? Why is the U.S. not broadcasting the 
secret of its own over-200-year longevity and urging that the 
UN Charter be transformed, as was our own Articles of 
Confederation, into an effective federal constitution? Do we 
really want to continue being the world's only superpower — 
as an oft-hated philanthropist, doling out relief to the rest of 
the world? Why don't we share our REAL wealth? That 
wealth is our empirical knowledge that a constitutional 
federal government can be helpful in times of individual 
mischief and fundamentally imperative in keeping member 
states out of perpetual chaos. 
It is not enough to blame UN failures on poor management or 
on lack of member-nation commitment, or even to admit that 
our assessment for UN peacekeeping is only a small fraction 
of our defense budget. These are only symptoms of the main 
problem: i.e., no legal penalty from the World Court for not 
being committed to the UN, no executive power of 
enforcement — in fact, no law to enforce in the first place and 
no legislative body to make the law! Furthermore, states not 
even in general agreement are expected to comply with what 
is vaguely referred to as "international law." Every tribal 
society, city, and nation has some form of government to 
make and enforce law; but at the world level, where most 
needed, there is none. 
The original signers of the UN Charter, Franklin D. 
Roosevelt for one, emphasized that it should not be 
considered a static document. "No plan is perfect," he said, 
way back then in 1945, "and whatever plan is adopted at San 
Francisco will doubtless have to be amended time and again 
over the years." In fact, a Charter Review Conference was 
proposed but, partly because of the long cold war, never 
carried out. 
With its Charter drafted in a far less complex era and with less 
than a third of its present number of member nations, the UN 
today does indeed need modernizing, but this involves basic 
structural changes, not merely superficial management 
improvement. Transformation of the Charter into a federal 
constitution would benefit the whole world. No nation-state 
would retain dominance, sovereignty- would reside with the 
world community, and any danger of dictatorship would be 
eliminated through checks and balances provided by an 
inherent separation of powers. The United Nations would 
thus retain its original noble principles while being enabled to 
carry them out, thus becoming much more than a lofty treaty. 
Early federalists, the framers of our Constitution, were not 
only bold but highly imaginative. Furthermore, they 
recognized the wisdom of their best combined thinking and 
then acted on the goals they had set for themselves and for the 
country. Though the past can never completely repeat itself, 
history shows that wisdom often lies in acting responsibly on 
the experience gained from it. - C.M. 
"The most important business on Earth today is the 
development and conversion of the United Nations into 
a world organization that can represent the world's 
peoples in all the ways that are essential to a planet that 
is both a single life-support system and a single 
geographig unit." Norman Cousins 
"We seek to strengthen the United Nations, to develop 
it into a system capable of resolving disputes on the 
basis of law." - John F. Kennedy 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 5]
C 0 6 6 8 717 7 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021 
SPRING 1993 THE OLD-DOMINION FEDERALIST Page 5 
Requiem 
Unlimited national sovereignty (UNS) is dead. Not a month 
goes by without some new horror story of a problem that will 
not yield to national solutions. 
The latest nail in the coffin of this outworn concept has just 
been reported by the media, but of course as always without a 
single reference to the need for enforceable world law or the 
institutions required to support it. In a little town north of 
the Mexican border there has been a spate of some fifteen 
cases of children who died because each had a fatal birth 
defect: lack of a physical brain. Numerous more such 
horrendous deaths are predicted for this community. How 
did this tragedy happen? 
Because Mexico has less stringent enforcement in such 
matters, U.S. corporations have been dumping and burning 
toxic waste materials across the border. When questioned, 
company officials point out that they are violating no law; 
they are in close communication with Mexican authorities. 
However, some of the materials are returning to U.S. soil in 
the form of smoke and other pollutants, causing the tragedies. 
What suffering the local Mexican population might be having 
to endure we are not told. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency authorities say that 
they are powerless to deal with the problem; it is out of their 
jurisdiction even though polluters and victims are all 
American. UNS has once again failed miserably. It cannot 
assure compliance with safe procedures. 
But none of this seems to prevent some otherwise rational 
persons from continuing to pray to their beloved idol at the 
altar of UNS. Remember, the present UN is supposed to be 
an organization of nations, not people. 
Fellow Federalists, UNS has nowhere to go. The signers of 
the Stockholm Initiative know this, and most WFA-ers know 
it. But the more timid ones are reluctant to speak their mind 
lest they be accused of being impractical. George Washington 
spoke directly to such persons: 
It is all too probable that no plan we propose will 
be adopted. Perhaps another dreadful conflict is to 
be sustained. If to please the people, we offer what 
we ourselves disapprove, how can we afterwards 
defend our work? Let us raise a standard to which 
the wise and honest can repair. The event is in the 
hand of God. 
Remember those reserved powers of the U.S. Constitution --
those powers which were not specifically ceded to the Federal 
Government which were therefore retained by the States? On 
the world level today, it is only these reserved powers that 
nations can expect to be able to exercise. Those problems that 
are incapable of national solutions must be delegated to world 
authority. The catch is that we have not yet empowered the 
only viable world institution, the United Nations, with the 
structure and the means to administer these delegated powers. 
We cannot afford to leave a stone unturned toward making 
1995 the year of major transition for the world organization, 
with Charter improvements that will enable it to cope with 
global problems. As Norman Cousins has often urged: 
United Nations national leaders must look back 
over the last 45 years and ask these fundamental 
questions: What has gone right? What has gone 
wrong? How can we strengthen what has gone 
right? And how can we correct what has gone 
wrong? What are the needs for the next 45 years? 
Do we have the means in place now for meeting 
those needs, and if not, how do we go about 
creating them? In short, what is the final necessity? 
And then, working back from necessity, construct 
the specific instruments which are necessary to 
give us a better chance for meeting those problems 
than we have right now. 
Let us therefore not be content at our Convocation to merely 
talk about "human rights" hoping that our critics will 
consider us practical after all. Let us instead lead our fellow 
citizens in solving these deadly problems in the only way in 
which they can ever be solved: through the application at the 
world level of civilization's greatest invention, the just rule of 
democratic and enforceable law. 
What better time than now to implement Norman Cousins' 
call? This issue of the Old-Dominion Federalist is devoted to a 
single purpose: pointing toward a sequence of events 
culminating in President Clinton's invitation to world leaders 
to participate in Charter review and revision. 
We need peace. We need human rights. We need 
disarmament. We need ozone in the stratosphere to protect 
us from ultraviolet radiation; we don't need it down here 
where we have to breathe. We need rain forests. We need 
non-acid rain. We need drinkable water and breatheable air. 
We need freedom from environmental dioxin, mercury, pcb's, 
lead, asbestos, and a thousand other hazardous materials. We 
need to keep plutonium away from the hands of terrorists. 
We need protection from future Chernobyls and Three Mile 
Islands. We need safe processing of hazardous materials, even 
if they are in someone else's back yard. All these needs have a 
single common denominator: our documented inability to 
meet them one nation at a time. 
UNS is dead. Something better must take its place. Will the 
May WFA Board address the solution? We need you there. FR 
"You will permit me to say, that a greater drama is now 
acting on this theatre than has heretofore been brought 
on the American stage, or any other in the world. We 
exhibit at present the novel and astonishing spectacle of 
a whole people deliberating calmly on what form of 
government will be most conducive to their happiness; 
and deciding with an unexpected degree of unanimity 
in favor of a system which they conceive calculated to 
answer the purpose." - George Washington to 
Sir Edward Newenham, August 29, 1788. 
P7g The Old-Dominion Federalist World Federalist Association, Virginia Chapter 
President: Ion Trevathan • Honorary President: Felsx Rosenthal 
Vice Presidents: Joan Chickering, Jeffrey H. Epstein, Mddred Reynolds 
Secretary/Treasurer: Robert M. Heppe 
Membership Chair: Susan Trevathan • Chair, Advisory Board: Cleo Michelsen 
Newsletter Editor: Cleo Michelsen • Publisher: Felix Rosenthal 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 6]
C 0 66 8 717 7 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021 
Page 6 THE OLD-DOMINION FEDERALIST SPRING 1993 
Town Hall 
The report of the recent international commission 
investigating killing of civilians, children, and priests in El 
Salvador was not news to many members of the World 
Federalists. Still it was shocking to see in cold type the 
murderous actions of the ruling elite. This was done with the 
aid of U.S. trained government troops, by a U.S. backed 
Salvadoran military establishment, by the implicit support of 
all U.S. citizens through their government. 
Many Sandinistas in Nicaragua have yet to get parcels of land 
as promised in the settlement of that struggle. Here, too, the 
U. S. government, that is you and I, were backing the forces 
of oppression and dictatorship of the land oligarchy. Our 
government broke our own laws in doing this. One of the 
perpetrators, Oliver North, is regarded by many as a hero. 
— Where is our sense of justice, our regard for the dignity of 
- - - human b .ings? We can hope with the election of Bill Clinton 77-
and the appointment of Mr. Christopher that this will change. 
Central ,and South America have, in the past, been regarded as 
the province of U.S. International Corporations, such as the 
United Fruit Company, which to a large extent influenced 
U.S. policy. Fortunately, this has begun to change. 
We hope that under Clinton the little people and democratic 
efforts rather than military elites and large landholders will 
receive suppport and hope. - Theodore W. Taylor 
"If a man becomes a citizen of the world, which many 
do, as he travels and works abroad and sees the merits 
of lands other than his own, he must, if he has any 
sensitivity at all, ask himself: 'To what entity do I owe 
my allegiance?' and it will not be preposterous for him 
to reply: 'I really owe my debt to the entire world, for I 
am as at home in London or Tokyo as I am in Sioux 
Falls, and I am just as obligated to the people of those 
areas as I am to those of South Dakota.' With me this 
question surfaced constantly because I have been at ease 
in all lands....Apparently I can work anywhere and in 
any climate, so it would be feasible for me to settle 
wherever my fancy dictates." - James A. Michener, 
The World Is My Home, 1992. 
It may be useful to hold a World Congress of citizens 
organizations from time to time, to monitor progress toward 
a democratic world federation, to decide on advancements 
needed, and to act as an advisory board to the United 
Nations. ...The best chance the Clinton Administration has 
must involve reversing the process that got us into such deep 
trouble. We must substitute law, order, justice, disarmament 
for the now-discredited attempt to achieve national security 
through military force. The federal principle applied at the 
world level offers the best way for solving nboth domestic and 
world problems.... 
Is it not realistic to work for a restructured and strengthened 
United Nations, now about to arrive at its 50th 
anniversary?...The third Global Structures Convocation: 
"Human Rights, Global Governance and the U.N. Charter" is 
our best means to that end. We should do everything possible 
to make it a strong, motivating success, through the media 
and through world political leadership, including Bill 
Clinton.... - Stanley Platt 
Related to my involvement in the Society of Friends, are my 
activities...with the World Council of Churches Ecumenical 
Movement, which seeks to achieve among Churches what 
WfA hopes for among Nations. There are interesting 
similarities in the two movements. Each of the various 
churches has its sovereignty, which it jealously guards. Each 
also has a certain "turf" that it is determined to defend. 
There are in churches the same needs for a more 
encompassing enity of fellowship as there are among nations, 
but the difficulties in balancing the needs for unity, and the 
presently enjoyed privileges and perquisites of those in 
positions of power, present problems in each case. 
It seems clear, however, that there is an inevitability in what 
WFA is seeking, and in what is sought by the World Council 
of Churches. Each of these efforts is faced with serious 
obstacles, so there may be some usefulness in exploring how 
the World Government Movement and the World 
Ecumenical Movement can be mutually supportive. ... 
Perhaps WFA should establish a "Think-tank Operation," 
consisting of a small group of "hard-nosed thinkers," to assess 
where we are and whither we should be tending. 
- Ward Harrington 
The name "federalists" has an honorable place in American 
-history. The Federalist Papers preceded the writing of the 
U.S. Constitution. It is a name that precisely indicates the 
direction of our advocacy: the delegation at the world level of 
the powers needed to address global problems (to the United 
Nations) and the retention by the nation-state of all other 
powers for national self-government and freedom. 
It is too easy to blame our delayed progress in advancing the 
cause of world federalism on the name, when, in actuality, 
external and internal factors have been predominate in 
slowing the course of history. . . . Now times have changed. 
The cold war is over. - Stanley Platt 
flbOADC 9 ,00©.©Og. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 7]
C 0 66 8 717 71ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021 
Page 6 THE OLD-DOMINION FEDERALIST SPRING 1993 
Town Hall 
The report of the recent international commission 
investigating killing of civilians, children, and priests in El 
Salvador was not news to many members of the World 
Federalists. Still it was shocking to see in cold type the 
murderous actions of the ruling elite. This was done with the 
aid of U.S. trained government troops, by a U.S. backed 
Salvadoran military establishment, by the implicit support of 
all U.S. citizens through their government. 
Many Sandinistas in Nicaragua have yet to get parcels of land 
as promised in the settlement of that struggle. Here, too, the 
U. S. government, that is you and I, were backing the forces 
of oppression and dictatorship of the land oligarchy. Our 
government broke our own laws in doing this. One of the 
perpetrators, Oliver North, is regarded by many as a hero. 
Where is our sense of justice, our regard for the dignity of 
human b:ings? We can hope with the election of Bill Clinton 
and the appointment of Mr. Christopher that this will change. 
Central and South America have, in the past, been regarded as 
the province of U.S. International Corporations, such as the 
United Fruit Company, which to a large extent influenced 
U.S. policy. Fortunately, this has begun to change. 
We hope that under Clinton the little people and democratic 
efforts rather than military elites and large landholders will 
receive suppport and hope. - Theodore W. Taylor 
"If a man becomes a citizen of the world, which many 
do, as he travels and works abroad and sees the merits 
of lands other than his own, he must, if he has any 
sensitivity at all, ask himself: 'To what entity do I owe 
my allegiance?' and it will not be preposterous for him 
to reply: 'I really owe my debt to the entire world, for I 
am as at home in London or Tokyo as I am in Sioux 
Falls, and I am just as obligated to the people of those 
areas as I am to those of South Dakota.' With me this 
question surfaced constantly because I have been at ease 
in all lands....Apparently I can work anywhere and in 
any climate, so it would be feasible for me to settle 
wherever my fancy dictates." - James A. Michener, 
The World Is My Home, 1992. 
It may be useful to hold a World Congress of citizens 
organizations from time to time, to monitor progress toward 
a democratic world federation, to decide on advancements 
needed, and to act as an advisory board to the United 
Nations. ...The best chance the Clinton Administration has 
must involve reversing the process that got us into such deep 
trouble. We must substitute law, order, justice, disarmament 
for the now-discredited attempt to achieve national security 
through military force. The federal principle applied at the 
world level offers the best way for solving nboth domestic and 
world problems.... 
Is it not realistic to work for a restructured and strengthened 
United Nations, now about to arrive at its 50th 
anniversary?...The third Global Structures Convocation: 
"Human Rights, Global Governance and the U.N. Charter" is 
our best means to that end. We should do everything possible 
to make it a strong, motivating success, through the media 
and through world political leadership, including Bill 
Clinton.... - Stanley Platt 
Related to my involvement in the Society of Friends, are my 
activities...with the World Council of Churches Ecumenical 
Movement, which seeks to achieve among Churches what 
WfA hopes for among Nations. There are interesting 
similarities in the two movements. Each of the various 
churches has its sovereignty, which it jealously guards. Each 
also has a certain "turf" that it is determined to defend. 
There are in churches the same needs for a more 
encompassing enity of fellowship as there are among nations, 
but the difficulties in balancing the needs for unity, and the 
presently enjoyed privileges and perquisites of those in 
positions of power, present problems in each case. 
It seems clear, however, that there is an inevitability in what 
WFA is seeking, and in what is sought by the World Council 
of Churches. Each of these efforts is faced with serious 
obstacles, so there may be some usefulness in exploring how 
the World Government Movement and the World 
Ecumenical Movement can be mutually supportive. ... 
Perhaps WFA should establish a "Think-tank Operation," 
consisting of a small group of "hard-nosed thinkers," to assess 
where we are and whither we should be tending. 
- Ward Harrington 
The name "federalists" has an honorable place in American 
history. The Federalist Papers preceded the writing of the 
U.S. Constitution. It is a name that precisely indicates the 
direction of our advocacy: the delegation at the world level of 
the powers needed to address global problems (to the United 
Nations) and the retention by the nation-state of all other 
powers for national self-government and freedom. 
It is too easy to blame our delayed progress in advancing the 
cause of world federalism on the name, when, in actuahty, 
external and internal factors have been predominate in 
slowing the course of history. . . . Now times have changed. 
The cold war is over. - Stanley Platt 
e©0@e@e@e@e@e 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 8]
C 0 6 6 8 717 7 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021 
SPRING 1993 THE OLD-DOMINION FEDERALIST Page 7 
A WORD OF THANKS 
Never cross a bridge until you come to it? The world will be indebted to you far-sighted ones 
who crossed the bridge ahead of the crowd. While archaic governments are undergoing 
political upheaval, with tension and polarization widespread, your vision of the new millenium --
with a world unit6d in peace -- is already inspiring a steady movement toward a democratically 
governed world. • • 
The philosopher Charlie Brown once told his friend Linus that "there is no heavier burden than a 
great potential." To realize the potential of world federation we must slay focused on our goai 
and support the grass roots work necessary to achieve it. 
Printing, postage, and phone bills are very costly as our membership grows. Despite our 
frugality the expenses are heavy. We are completely dependent on volunteer workers, some of 
whom even shoulder the major expenses. 
We have dedicated leaders, but the continuation of our work depends on those who, like you, 
combine their noble vision with an understanding of responsibility. 
Pleasle use the enclosed envelope to help us keep and' increase the rnomentum already 
established in our Virginia Chapter. 
"There is nothing so powerful as an idea whose time has come." 
-- Victor Hugo 
PLEASE CLIP AND MAIL: 
WFA-Virginia Chapter 
5622 Columbia Pike, Suite 203 
Falls Church, Virginia 22041-2718 
I'm with you! Our Virginia chapter must continue its work, and you may count on my , 
support. Enclosed is my contribution of: 
( ) $35 ( I $50 ( I $100 ( I $300 ( S500 ( ) Other 
Our sincere thanks for what you are doing. Please make your check payable to WFA-
Virginia and mail to the above address. All contributions are tax-deductible. 
Please print: 
Name 
Address 
Zip Phone 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687177 Date: 02/09/2021 —