[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 3 5 4 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690354 Date: 07/22/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL 
THE DIPLOMAT 
31 Meadow Wood Drive 
Greenwich, CT 06830 
(203) 869-1199 
CHILE 
OCTOBER, 1993 
Landing in Santiago one spots high snow covered mountains and a layer of smog surrounding 
the city. Driving from the airport to the city you see much poverty, yet learn that the government 
, has put in new programs that allow everyone a minimum wage and if capable of earning enough 
to save $180 per month for a house can own one. Thus there is almost no unemployment in the 
country. But there are extremes between the upper class and the poor. 
We started our journey in Santiago by taking a city tour, which included the two hills Santa 
Lucia and San Christobel, residential areas, and a site inspection of the Park Plaza Hotel, a 
lovely small hotel situated in a residential area and close to shops and the business district. With 
a swimming pool on the roof and elegant rooms this hotel is highly recommended. Do take a trip 
on the Metro, one of the cleanest, inexpensive and elegant subway rides in the world. The next 
day we had site inspections of the Hyatt and Carrera Hotels, both also to be highly recommended 
and lunch at the Kempinski. Beginning with Pisco sours and other drinks this lavish lunch 
featured Chilean hors d'oeuvres, salmon, potatoes, vegetables, scrumptious desserts and Chilean 
wines. A truly memorable meal and lovely small hotel to stay in the downtown area. Our two 
nights were spent at the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza, which I found outdated, expensive and the 
food only so-so in comparison to the above mentioned hotels. The afternoon found us at Concha 
Y Toro, Chile's largest winery. The wines were quite good and we tasted several unavailable in 
the U.S., including their Late Harvest, so named for a late rainfall that almost destroyed the 
grapes several years ago. This is a sweet wine, similar to a sauterne. 
The following day we headed south to Puerto Montt, where we were transferred to a bus that 
took us to Chiloe Island. After an extremely lengthy ride, partially by ferry, we arrived in 
Castro, known for its houses on stilts and good seafood. Lunch was oyster soup and fresh trout. 
This is only a trip for someone with lots of endurance and time and seeking an out-of-the-way 
place, perhaps campers, as there is not much to see, do or places to stay. Puerto Montt sits to the 
west of the Lake Region, which is reached by bus driving through Petrohue, Puerto Varas and 
around Lake Llanquihue, Chile's largest lake. We visited Petrohue River Falls and then just 
made our catamaran to ride across Lake. Todos Los Santos to Peulla. Peulla can only be reached 
from Chile by boat, or from Argentina by two boats and a bus, an all day trip. Lunch here was at 
the Hotel Peulla, which served a delightful tomato broth, fettucini and fluffy dessert. Pisco sours 
were served first and wine with lunch. Dinner that night was in the Club de Yates in Puerto 
Montt, a charming waterfront restaurant which served mussel stew and trout. Even though Chile 
raises some of the finest vegetables, fruits and seafood, vegetables are almost nonexistent on 
menus. 
Our next stop was a flight to Punta Arenas and from there a long bus ride north to Paine 
National Park. I mean long. We stopped after a while at a lovely estancia for lunch, once again 
Pisco sours, hors d'oeuvres, lamb, fresh vegetables, creme caramel and good Chilean wines. 
After another few hours we arrived in Puerto Natales. From here the boats depart for the glaciers 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690354 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 0 3 5 4 :IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690354 Date: 07/22/2021 
and fjords of Chile. We bought film, woolens, and postcards, upon hearing that nothing might be 
available in Paine National Park. Our arrival at Paine was about 10:30 that night, but since 
another group of travel writers and agents from Argentina and Bolivia was also arriving dinner 
was served about 11:30. Be forewarned the Chileans dine late usually after 9:30. We were told 
that on waking our view would be spectacular. and it was - a crystal blue lake and mountains 
everywhere. The new Explora Hotel was Shangri-La. People who had been to the Tetons said 
they had never seen anything like it. The Hotel opens October 16 and is being developed by the 
family that owns Ladeco, the airline we traveled throughout this trip from New York to Santiago 
and return. The airline is efficient, small planes (international 757), but excellent service and 
food (in abundance on every flight). The Hotel is shaped like a boat on the lake with lovely light 
woods and views from every room. Although in a rustic setting, one almost feels in a resort with 
light and wicker furniture. The staff is efficient and still being trained. Meals need some 
improvement, but as a whole the setting is what counts. The next day made our whole trip, 
venturing off to the Park's Administrative headquarters and then hiking into the glaciers and 
icebergs. Paine is not for the average tourist, but rather one with a keen sense of nature, love of 
the outdoors and fit to hike, mountain climb, travel long distances and be prepared for all types 
of weather. The Hotel is prepared to stay open all winter, and with thirty rooms is a cozy place 
to spend a week, not less. 
Returning to Santiago we spent one last day, each on our own. Two headed off to ski and for site 
inspections in Portillo, six to Vina Del Mar and Valpariso, and the rest stayed in Santiago. I was 
fortunate enough to have a friend teaching at The International School, so spent a morning with 
her and visiting with the headmaster. I was then picked up to tour Cousino Macul, anOther 
vineyard just to the south of Santiago, by another friend who had been the enologist there and is 
now a consultant to all the Chilean wineries in developing an international marketing strategy 
for them. One of the best meals of my trip was at the Sheraton San Christobel where we had 
spent the previous night. Following that I visited the Santiago World Trade Center which is 
developing a program to promote international business in Chile, and finally just before 
departing visiting the Explora office. 
Much of Chile appears to be the U.S. 40-50 years ago - old cars, many ladas, houses without_ 
dishwashers, a phone system in need of upgrading( though every small hotel, even in 
out-of-the-way places had a fax), and a people who seem to have been isolated from the oUtside. 
world for the last thirty years. They are hungry for U.S. and foreign dollars and investment in 
the economy. An election in December will most likely keep the same coalition government, 
which has privatized many industries and promoted international investment. But some vestigeš: 
of the old regime remain, mainly General Pinochet as head of the Armed Forces. The country ik 
magnificent and as a tourist destination I must recornmend it to all. 
Katie Holmes 
Editor 
= 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690354 Date: 07/22/2021