[Page 1]
C O6 6 8 6 8 5 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686858 Date: 02/09/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL 
INTERNATIONAL RECIPROCAL TRADE ASSOCIATION 
July 28, 1993 
The President 
The White House 
Washington, D.C. 20500 
Dear Mr. President: 
Even with the $3 billion in additional aid earmarked for the Russian Federation 
by the Group of Seven at their Tokyo meeting, it is evident that Russia and the 
former Eastern bloc and USSR successor states will be unable to meet many priority 
import requirements in both consumer and capital goods due to a shortage of hard 
currency. I am writing to draw your attention to an historic opportunity for your 
Administration to formally announce a policy of promoting barter arrangements to 
satisfy the priority import needs of these countries after their scarce supply of 
hard currency is fully allocated. 
A polky of promoting barter arrangements to finance essential imports would 
complement existing policy by providing a third alternative to conventional trade 
and aid to assist the Eastern countries in reconstructing their economies. The 
next decade will be a decisive transition period when privatization must take hold, 
capital formation encouraged, and competitive economic units established throughout 
this vast area. An additional increment of resources provided through barter trade 
can make a significant contribution to economic development and welfare in these 
economies. - 
A policy of promoting maximum utilization of barter as a trade instrumentWill  _ 
have powerful advantages: 
• it will stimulate exports from this country by providing a means of 
payment when hard currency is not available; 
• it will increase demand for the products of Eastern countries, many of 
them now languishing in recession; 
• it will enable each country to reserve its hard currency for its most 
urgent requirements by assigning its unfulfilled needs to a barter trade 
list; and 
• rather than watching defaulted Eastern bloc loans become, for all 
practical purposes, outright grants, there will be an opportunity for such 
debt to be repaid at least in part through the proceeds from barter 
arrangements. 
9513 BEACH MILL ROAD • GREAT FALLS, VA 22066 • (703) 759-1473 
FAX: (703) 759.0792 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686858 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 8 6 8 5 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686858 Date: 02/09/2021 
e . 
" • 
-2-
A public and private sector partnership to facilitate barter trade can make a 
vital contribution in present economic conditions. The members of this Association 
comprise the largest repository of barter expertise in major countries. We are 
convinced that barter enables trade to flow where it might otherwise be precluded. 
The limitations of conventional finance place an upper limit on the magnitude of 
trade through the international monetary system. At this limit many industries 
have excess capacity but lack effective demand. Non-traditional finance employing 
barter enables such industries to produce and sell additional output, and thus to 
turn spare capacity to productive use. Properly executed, production on barter 
account results in an incremental addition to total output and sales, while not 
displacing cash sales. 
Through a public-private partnership between private barter companies and 
participating governments, we can: 
• assure payment for bartered imports is made in local currency by customers 
in the host country, and that host country producers receive payment in 
local currency for their barter exports; and 
• minimize performance risks in the host country, such as failure to make 
payment or deliver goods that have been contracted for. 
• assure official support to deal with production or transportation 
bottlenecks in host countries; 
Under barter arrangements, the host country customers will make, and producers 
will receive, payment in their own currency. U.S. exporters will be paid from the 
proceeds of the sale of the barter company or consortium of barter companies with 
cognizanee over the transaction. In the typicaLtransaction,-buyers_will_have=been • - — - --
arranged beforehand for the host country's products-.-- ---
There are several ways U.S. governmental agencies-call-contribute-if-your_  
Administration decides to encourage barter trade_a&national policy: -------
• The Department of State can encourage-the cooperation-of-the Russian - 
Federation and other countries with commercial barter companies who can 
begin at once to plan and organize barter finance of priority imports for 
which hard currency is not available. -= 
• The Department of Commerce can encourage participation of U.S. industry in 
barter arrangements to increase U.S. exports. 
• The Department of Agriculture can encourage expansion of U.S. farm exports 
on private commercial barter terms, without triggering the restrictions 
that apply to aid shipments, such as the statutory transport cost 
limitation. A portion of barter sales proceeds can be earmarked to repay 
host country debt by adjusting the terms of trade for bartered goods to 
include a debt repayment premium. 
• The Department of Treasury can provide expedited consideration of 
technical questions on taxes and import duties arising from barter trade. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686858 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 8 6 8 5 8 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686858 Date: 02/09/2021 
-3-
• The Departments of Energy and Defense can make purchases of bartered 
commodities for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve and the Strategic 
Stockpile. 
• The Environmental Protection Agency can encourage barter exports of goods 
essential for environmental cleanup. (Barter finance may be the principal 
means of payment available for environmental exports.) 
• The Agency for International Development can encourage barter finance in 
its technical assistance and development programs. 
• Our rvernment's Enterprise Funds in the Baltics, Hungary, Bulgaria, 
Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus can fund local entities capable of 
participating in the development and management of barter trade. 
• The Export-Import Bank can advance proceeds to U.S. exporters so they will 
not have to wait for payment until bartered goods can be liquidated. 
While it may be useful to explore government participation in risk-sharing in 
particular transactions, we wish to stress that a national policy of fostering 
barter trade need not cost the Federal government any money. Barter transactions 
can be or&anized and liquidated on strictly commercial terms, with the 
participating interests sharing the risks and profits. Barter companies would in 
general be compensated for their services by a retainer, commission, or a 
combination of the two. 
The 130 barter companies in seven countries, (U.S., Canada, Great Britain, 
Australia, New Zealand, Iceland, and South Africa) who belong to the International 
Reciprocal Trade Association are convinced that you have an historic opportunity to 
provide a sipificant additional increment of resources-to-the-capitaktarverd" - 
countries of Eastern Europe by breaking out of the restraints of conventional 
finance and encouraging barter as an instrument of trade policy. As professional 
practitioners, we are prepared to join with you in a publiC-private-partnership to —   
formulate and implement a national barter trade pdlicy. 
I appreciate the opportunity to bring this matter to-your atterition:Slibuld-
you have any questions, please do not hesitate to call on our Association. 
Sincerely, 
PAUL E. SUPLIZIO 
Chief Executive Officer 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686858 Date: 02/09/2021