[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 8 6 8 3 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686832 Date: 02/09/2021 
POLICY AND 
PLANS 
RELEASE IN FULL 
THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
2050 DEFENSE PENTAGON 
WASHINGTON, DC 20301-2050 
MEMO TO: STROBE TALBOTT 
FROM: GRAHAM ALLISON and BG RILEY 
SUBJ: Post-Planning Discussion with NSC Vice Chairman Zhukeyev and 
MOD Chief of Staff Gen Major Kazimov 
93- fri-a 
September 22, 1993 
Having sketched our views of the U.S.-Kazakh security relationship, we invited 
their questions or comments. Zhukeyev spoke candidly and persuasively about 
Kazakh security concerns, especially in recent dealings with Russia. Having served 
as President Nazerbayev's principal interlocutor with Ukraine, Zhukeyev also gave us 
his views on developments there. Major points included: 
1. Concern about Russian unilateralism and increasing Russian pressure 
upon other states of the former Soviet Union. Examples included: Russia's unilateral 
abolition of unified control of strategic nuclear weapons and assumption of direct 
Russian command; claims upon Kazakh territory and facilities when General Grachev 
visited Baykonur; recent unilateral withdrawal of 14 nuclear warheads without 
discussion with the Kazakh government; unwillingness to sign an agreement on 
sharing the economic value of HEU in warheads; and "extortion" in oil pricing 
according to which Russia sells oil to Kazakh refineries at 3 times the price it buys oil 
from Kazakh wells imposing a net added cost of $500 million annually. He argued that 
such unilateral heavy-handedness had increased in the last four months. He argued 
that such Russian actions made it difficult to impossible for responsible leaders to 
defend before parliamentary opposition accession to the NPT or early deactivation. 
He argued that some way would have to be found to restore unified authority over 
nuclear forces, since otherwise, Russian forces would be guarding Russian missiles 
on Kazakh soil. "We cannot recognize these forces' presence, technically or legally. 
We did not lose a war. We could not explain this to the Kazakh people or defend it in 
the Parliament. We have no desire to control nuclear weapons. But some way must 
be found to allow our leadership to say that these forces report to a commander who is 
responsible to our leaders. We should also have some participation- in planning for 
the dismantlement of these weapons and an ability to monitor this process." 
2. Zhukeyev and Kazimov made a persuasive case that Kazakhstan has no 
desire to control nuclear weapons and every intention of fulfilling its agreements 
regarding NPT and denuclearization. But in trying to work this problem, particularly 
against rising nationalist sentiment in Kazakhstan and increasing strident nationalist 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686832 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
C O6 6 8 6 8 3 2 7IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686832 Date: 02/09/2021 
2 
assertiveness in Russia, the Kazakh leadership needs some consideration from the 
Russian Ieadership. 
3. Ukraine's problem is much more difficult. "We have some influence with 
our legislature. Kravchuk has almost none. Indeed they may act just the opposite of 
the action he urges." At Yalta, Russia blackmailed Kravchuk with oil and gas. RADA 
will debate joining Russia's economic union beginning 16 September. Zhukeyev 
judges odds on joining as 50-50. Without economic union, Ukraine is finished. If 
Russia cuts off oil and gas, Kravchuk and Kuchma will be forced out. Parliament will 
either postpone START and NPT or ratify START with conditions likely to be ' 
unacceptable and postpone NPT. Because all of this is being forced upon Ukraine, 
compliance will be unlikely. 
4. The most useful signals for Kazakhstan at this point would be (1) 
agreement on sharing the economic value of HEU in warheads and (2) some action to 
restore an apparent unified military command of nucs -- recognizing that this is a 
figleaf to provide political defense for Nazerbayev and Kravchuk. For Nazerbayev it is 
essential to be able to explain that Russian commanders of nuclear bases in 
Kazakhstan report to some higher political authority of which the Kazakh president is a 
member. 
5. Talbott Septel explains Nazerbayev responded very positively to the 
delegation's "turning of the page" -- in a replay of Aspin's first trip to Ukraine. He 
asked for rapid and robust: (1) strengthening relations with the U.S.; (2) military and 
defense contacts; (3) integration into NATO through NACC; (4) support for economic 
reform including privatization; and (5) support for Kazakhstan's policy of maintaining 
good neighborly relations with all neighbors: Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan. 
6. BG Riley discussed military cooperation With Gen MajOr KaziMoV of the 
Ministry of Defense. Kazimov was informed that-a-permarient Defenše-Aitach'e-Would - 
be assigned to Ambassador Courtney's staff and International Military Education_and_ 
Training (IMET) funding would be doubled to $100K-in 1-994 (thiS ihcrease funding 
is being debated in Congress now and is in doubt)._ - • 
Kazimov explained that his highest priority for use of remaining FY 1993 IMET 
funding was establishment of an English language training lab in AlMaty. Note: This 
request was previously processed by U.S.-Mission-Kazakhstan-and-the-lab.should be-
installed this fall. 
Cooperation on such matters as NCO development, entry level soldier training, 
civil-military relations, military law, and resource management (all areas of interest to 
Kazimov) is possible and can best be coordinated through the country teani. 
Although not discussed with either Gen Kazimov or Ambassador Courtney, 
cooperation with the Kazakh military will probably best be managed through DSAA 
and traditional security assistance means. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686832 Date: 02/09/2021