[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 90 2 5FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699025 Date: 08/26/2019 
CONFIDENTIAL 
NODIS 9617437/1 
DECAPTIONED 6572 
THE WHITE HOUSE 
WASH I NGTON 
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
[RELEASE IN FULL1 
DECLASSIFIED 
SUBJECT: Meeting with Foreign Minister of Russia 
Yevgeniy Primakov (U) 
PARTICIPANTS: U.S. Participants 
The President 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher 
U.S. Ambassador to the, United Nations 
Madeleine Albright 
Chief of Staff to the President, Leon Panetta 
National Security Advisor Anthony Lake 
Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott 
Ki Fort (NSC notetaker) 
Peter Afanasenko (U.S. interpreter) 
Russian Participants 
Foreign Minister Yevgeniy Primakov 
Deputy Foreign Minister Yuriy Mamedov 
Russian Ambassador to the United States 
Yuriy Vorontsov 
Russian Ambassador to the United Nations 
Sergey Lavrov 
Chief of Staff to Foreign Minister Primakov 
Robert Markaryan (notetaker) 
Russian Interpreter 
DATE, TIME September 24, 1996, 12:45-1:15 p.m. 
AND PLACE: U.S. Mission to the United Nations, New York 
The formal meeting was preceded by a brief one-on-one encounter 
in which Foreign Minister Primakov assured the President that the 
political situation in Russia was calm, despite President 
Yeltsin's illness. Foreign Minister, Primakov said that while he 
had been surprised by the decision to postpone Yeltsin's surgery, 
everything was in order and that there would be stability and 
continuity during the time Yeltsin was incapacitated. Prime 
Minister Chernomyrdin was running the government day-to-day. The 
President welcomed these assurances, replying that the'United 
States was very supportive of Russia and would do what it could 
to help maintain stability at this time. 
The President: I want to begin by saying that I am thinking of 
President Yeltsin, of his health and surgery. There must be 
great continuity during this time. I assured him that we would 
CONFIDENTIAL 
Reason: 1.5 (d) 
Declassify On: 1.6 x6 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, 
- A/GIS/IPS 6/25/2019 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699025 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 9 0 2 5=1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699025 Date: 08/26/2019 
CONFIDENTIAL  2 
keep our relationship on an even keel; we would do all we could 
to work closely together. _key 
I am glad we have agreed on the (TMD) demarcation zone. I know 
that START II ratification is difficult for you. But I hope that 
you soon can ratify START II, so we can continue to talk about 
further reductions. We could get the Indians soon into CTBT. 
--Fe+ 
Secretary Christopher briefed me about your discussion on NATO 
expansion. I know it's a difficult issue for you. On the NATO-
Russia relationship, you agreed that Strobe and Yuriy would 
continue discussions. I would like to make only two points: 
First, I have been committed, since I took office, to help a 
strong, democratic Russia that would be a major partner into the 
twenty-first century. That's a very important question. There 
may bé a problem between India and Pakistan within twenty-five 
years that only Russia and the United States can solve. We have 
made prbgress in the Middle East. If there's ever to be a 
settlement there, it will be because of our working together. 
Second, I have wanted a unified Europe -- for the first time 
since there have been nation states there. I believe that the 
expansion of NATO is part of that strategy, not to threaten 
anyone, but to be part of a unified Europe. This is important 
for European stability and security. 
NATO is working in cooperation with Russia in specific instances, 
as in Bosnia, ,where we've cooperated better than anyone thought 
possible. And if there's a special relationship between NATO and 
Russia, we can continue to work together. I say this not to ask 
you to agree right now about NATO enlargement but to say that as 
I look to the twenty-first century I believe the world needs a 
strong, democratic Russia working as a partner with the United 
States As to the details, let's leave them to be worked out, for 
example, between Yuriy and Strobe. I'm just expressing my 
general views. What we need to have, though, is U.S.-Russian 
leadership and partnership. We'd never do anything to affect 
that negatively _4;4_ 
Foreign Minister Primakov:  First, let me express my gratitude 
for this opportunity to meet with you. We understand full well 
that relations with the United States are of great, if not 
primary, importance among our priorities. (S",;) 
Of course, we have differences and divergences. But they do not 
affect the main thing, which is the durability of our relations. 
The differences might be caused by a different mentality. The 
CLairs--1-13E-N12-11TL 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699025 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 9 9 0 2 5:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699025 Date: 08/26/2019 
eel+F-14;g4=1.11L____ 3 
negative attitude of our population towards NATO expansion could 
be that among new members may be former Warsaw Pact countries. 
This creates certain stereotypes in the minds of people.  
You made a wonderful speech today, and I would like to note one 
of the most important developments today -- our missiles are not 
aimed at each other. But if we were increasing the number of our 
missiles, even if they were not aimed at you, I think you would 
not like it. One should cope with the existing mentality. But 
that should not detract from our relations. We value the help 
that, under you, the United States has rendered to reforms and 
change in Russia. 4C4 
You said that we cooperated quite well in Bosnia. I think not 
all our reserves are exhausted in cooperation in the Middle East. 
I am ready to work with Secretary Christopher in that area. In 
one month, if all goes well, I will make a tour of the Middle 
East. Afterwards, I will share my impressions with the 
Secretary. ...44%) 
What you said on the subject of India and Pakistan, we should all 
think about. We are also of the opinion that there could be a 
conflict in which nuclear weapons could be used. We work, as far 
as we can, with India. I don't think all is already lost, with 
regard to changing (India's) position with regard to the (CTBT) 
Treaty. 4:4-
The latest crisis in Afghanistan is of great concern to us all. 
To my mind, there has not been enough thought to consequences. 
Because if the country is split, the entire map of that region 
could change. Iran and Tajikistan would be involved and, of 
course, many other countries in the area. (C) 
We are doing all we can to solve conflicts on CIS territory. But 
(we do so) openly and we are willing to have the international 
community involved. In Chechnya, we are on the road to peace. 
But there are three dangers: first, the government coalition 
should take into account all the movements that exist there; 
second, armed clashes could continue and could provoke violence; 
and the third and greatest (danger) is to prevent nationalist 
feelings from heating up during this time period when a 
moratorium is imposed on Chechnya's status. This is why we are 
against discussion of Chechnya at the international level, as the 
separatists proposed. When the Baltic countries stated their 
intention to recognize the state of Ickheria -- in Chechnya -- we 
warned them that we would break relations. >4 
But the main thing is our understanding with the United States --
and with the European countries. Once again, our policy differs, 
but despite that, we would never do anything that could harm. the 
_CLIN-F--143ENITA:L7
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699025 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 4]
C O 6 6 9 9 O 2 5:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699025 Date: 08/26/2019 
4 
policy of the United States. You can see that everywhere, in 
Cuba, in the Middle East. I met the Cuban Foreign Minister 
today. I told him we most wanted democratization of Cuba and 
normalization of its relations with the United States. 
President Clinton: Thanks. We would like to be reconciled with 
Cuba. —444 
Foreign Minister Primakov: With Iraq, we used all means at our 
disposal to keep them from provoking things; we are quite 
satisfied when they say they will not now (do more). _key 
President Clinton: Chris, anything else? (U) 
Secretary Christopher: I think we should go forward, along the 
lines we have discussed, that the talks with Yuriy and Strobe 
should be our highest priority. It will be very desirable, if by 
the time of the meetings in December, we have agreements. (2) 
Foreign Minister Primakov: I am not as optimistic; there is not 
sufficient time to make such a weighty document. I think, 
naturally, this is a subject on which we should work. I welcome 
the fact that Mr. Talbott and Mr. Mamedov will work actively. 
With regard to CFE, it's very important to us to step up work on 
the Treaty. The more so, since there was agreement on that 
between President Clinton and President Yeltsin. It seems our 
two ministries should carry forward those instructions. --(-1E)-
President Clinton: Thank you. Good to see you again. (U) 
.Foreign Minister Primakov: Jthank you. (U) 
End of Conversation 
CONFMENTTAT,,_
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699025 Date: 08/26/2019