[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 8 6 96 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686969 Date: 02/09/2021 
• 
RELEASE IN PART 
B6 
United-States Department of State 
Ambassador-at-Large and 
Special Adviser to the Secretary on the 
New Independent States 
Washington, D.C. 20520 
August 30, 1993 
Dear Senator Dodd: 
I am writing in response to your letter of May 7th regarding 
the possibility that some of the work involved in dismantling 
Russian nuclear submarines could be carried out in private sub-
marine yards here in the United States, and that this effort 
could be funded under the Nunn-Lugar program. Let me assure you 
first and foremost that the Administration fully recognizes the 
valuable contribution that U.S. submarine builders and their 
employees have made to this nation's security, and understands 
the concerns they must face as we move into a post-Cold War era 
of limited defense budgets and changing priorities. 
At the same time, having reviewed this issue within the 
Executive Branch, I must report our finding that the approach you 
have described for providing additional work to U.S. submarine 
yards 'raises a number of concerns. From a legal perspective, 
environmental statutes would create practical impediments to this 
approach, and the import of foreign nuclear reactors would be 
subject to the Atomic Energy Act's provisions regardless of 
whether they contain nuclear fuel. 
There are also a number of policy grounds which indicate that 
it would not be prudent to try to overcome these impediments. , 
The proposed activities would not pay for themselves, and subsi-
dizing them would not appear to be a wise use of taxpayer money. 
Attempting to work on nuclear systems of unfamiliar design could 
also pose real safety problems whibh could prove very expensive 
to overcome. For these and other reasons, we could not support 
using Nunn-Lugar funds to finance the sort of endeavor you have 
described. Because of your particular interest in this matter, I 
have asked our experts on these issues to provide me with addi-
tional details about the considerations on which are judgements 
are based; these follow below. 
"Know-How" Issues.  For a country that has built nuclear-
powered submarines, the task of dismantling them safely is not 
technologically challenging. There is certainly no dismantlement 
technology that the United States has but the Russians lack, as 
The Honorable 
Christopher J. Dodd, 
United States Senate. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686969 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 8 6 96 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686969 Date: 02/09/2021 
- 2 - 
evidenced by the fact that they have already dismantled some 
nuclear submarines. Indeed, not only would the U.S. have no 
comparative advantage in dismantling Russian subs, but it would 
almost certainly be harder for us to safely dismantle nuclear-
powered submarines that were built by the Russians than it would 
be for the Russians to do so themselves. This simply reflects 
the unique design information that only the Russians would know 
-- information that, for obvious reasons, they may be less than 
willing to hand over to us, just as we would be reluctant to 
provide similar, detailed information about our submarine designs 
to Moscow. 
$afety and Environmental Concerns. The poor safety record of 
the Russian Navy's nuclear propulsion program has been enough to 
lead some Russian communities that are near dismantlement and 
storage facilities to try to block such activities. While these 
safety problems would, of course, be mitigated here in the U.S., 
it would be difficult to explain to the communities surrounding 
U.S. facilities why they should be willing to accept the same 
perceived risks. Moreover, storing any foreign radioactive 
material in U.S. soil would be especially complicated, given the 
difficulties of finding sites to store radioactive wastes ,that 
are generated domestically. 
Even if the entire reactor compartments of Russia's subs were 
removed in Russia, the questionable safety record of the Soviet 
submarine fleet, and particularly of its early-generation nuclear 
submarines, would raise questions about the safety of any U.S. 
workers that would be involved in their dismantlement; thus 
driving up the cost of the work in-brderf-t-67ffitiOte—Wriÿ thIch—
concerns. Furthermore, under these or any circumstances, the 
towing of Russian submarines to U.S. jibitsi4ould'alsci be techni-
cally difficult and problematic. And if federal funds were used 
in this process, the entire effort would have to be considered 
under the National Environmental polickAdt,--4nd-vidlild-Ordbably 
require an environmental impact statement. 
Cost Considerations and Subsidy Conterns. There ere asnumber 
of other financial considerations that argue strongly against the 
idea of dismantlement in the U.S. First of all -- even excluding 
the costs of handling the reactor compartment, spent fuel, and 
other radioactive materials -- simply dismantling the rest of a 
submarine costs the U.S. nearly $10 million per boat. And while 
there has been much talk about the value of the scrap products 
that are produced through dismantlement, our estimates indicate 
these wOuld yield only about $0.6 million per boat. Thus, there 
would be at least $9 million dollars in costs to cover for each 
Russian boat that was dismantled at a U.S. facility. 
It seems unlikely that Russia would be willing to foot this 
bill since, as noted above, it is not their shipyard capacity 
that is lacking but primarily their failure to devote the 
necessary funds (including funds for proper storage and disposal 
of radioactive waste) that is hampering their own dismantlement 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686969 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 8 6 96 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686969 Date: 02/09/2021 
- 3 - 
process. Were the U.S. to fund such an endeavor instead, 
however, it would -- as your letter suggests -- have the effect 
of freeing up Russian resources for continued production of high-
quality submarines. This is something that American taxpayers --
and particularly those involved in submarine construction who 
face budget cuts here at home -- would probably have a hard time 
understanding. 
Nunn-Lugar Concerns. We would be particularly opposed to the 
idea of using Nunn-Lugar funds to cover Russia's submarine dis-
mantlement costs because this would divert limited resources from 
our higher priority efforts aimed at reducing the danger posed by 
the continued presence and deployment -- and possible prolifera-
tion -- of nuclear warheads and other weapons of mass destruction 
in the former Soviet Union. We have focussed our efforts under 
Nunn-Lugar on addressing the most important potential threats to 
U.S. national security. Thus, we have set aside a certain amount 
of Nunn-Lugar funds to help Russia specifically with the task of 
dismantling missile compartments from their ballistic missile 
submarines -- because these compartments will have to be elimi-
nated in order to comply with the START Treaty, and because the 
SLBMs they hold have the capability to threaten the territory of 
the United States. By contrast, the retired and aging attack and 
cruise missile submarines that constitute the bulk of Russia's 
submarine dismantlement backlog are so old and obsolete that they 
pose little or no military threat -- and thus their dismantlement 
would not contribute much to U.S. security. 
I hope this information proves-helpful-to=you-in-terms-of- - 
understanding our various concerns . In_closing, • let_me_reiterate-
that our serious reservations about-thi-s -approach-reflect-no-lack 
of concern about the plight of defense workers==,_ as-the:-_ _ - 
President's recent retraining proposals make clear.- Also=i-my 
colleagues in the Defense Department-assure-me-that-industri-al-_ 
base considerations are a key factor-in their_efforts to plan-for 
an effective submarine force that is consistent with fiscal 
realities. If you have any further guestiofis,-in_this_regard, 
please do not hesitate to raise them. _ 
1.14.LMAJG AU1AJW4.1.- 
r 7 /7(  t /r 
- t1/
6 /- 
t(A,  </,--(--7_ 
J 2-",$) 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686969 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 6 9FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686969 Date: 02/09/2021 
Drafted: PM/STP: PEllis SESDIDST#551 7-7426 8/5/93 
Cleared: PM: RDavis 
T: JTimbie 
EUR/ISCA: AWasserman 
H/LMO: TLodge 
S/NIS: -Far-a-rek- 3crifsit-, 
L/PM: NHighsmith 
OSD/NS&CP: SFetter 
JCS/J-5: CAPT Norris 
USN: STrautman 
ACDA/SNA: MFoughty (subs 
ACIS: RTrout 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686969 Date: 02/09/2021