[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 36 4 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690364 Date: 07/22/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL 
THE DIPLOMAT 
31 Meadow Wood Drive 
Greenwich, CT 06830 
(203) 869-1199 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
Vietnam and Laos: Future of the Past II 
December 3 and 4 
The Asia Society, New York 
The Asia Society recently held a two day conference on Vietnam and Laos, which followed last 
year's very successful one on Cambodia. Being somewhat ignorant on this part of the world, 
other than seeing Indochine and several Vietnam War stories, I took the time to participate. 
What transpired was a fascinating dialogue with attendees and lecturers from all over the world. 
The topics ranged from politics to culture to tourism. What these two countries wish to preserve 
is their cultural heritage and yet promote tourism and economic growth. Both have been 
devastated by war and financially do not have the means to do this. Laos is only permitting in a 
certain number of tourists, either researchers or affluent tourists each year, and though Vietnam 
is promoting tourism they do not have a developed infrastructure to handle large numbers. 
Ho Weyer, the Vietnamese cannot presently come here as there no office to issue visas. Art 
thievery has been a major problem. As part of the 1989 Penal code of Laos destruction or 
thievery of cultural artifacts is very strictly controlled. 
What do they have to offer? Both have cultures extending back thousands of years. Many 
temples, pagodas, villages and caves are almost unexplored and many in disrepair. However 
their use of gold, etchings and other architectural amenities offer much to the human eye. Later 
European influences changed some cities, but left a major impact as seen in Vientiane , Saigon, 
Hue and Ho Chi Minh City. Each region has its own style of architecture, clothing, music, 
language, court traditions, monuments, crafts and rituals. Some of these people have been 
isolated for so long they know only their way of life. Should it be up to us to introduce Western 
habits? Our, quote, more civilized habits don't necessarily fit into isolated mountain 
communities, where there are no modern plumbing facilities, electricity, but where there is a 
sense of family, extended village life and all are one. As refugees have returned this has been 
very evident. Each of these countries needs a national cultural identity. Yes, during the war we 
destroyed cities and ancient temples. Now is the time to make retribution and contribute 
fmancially to the rebuilding. The concept of museum or restoration are new terms and our help 
would be appreciated. - 
Yes, there are problems. The Laotians are fearful AIDS will be brought with their link to the 
outside world through a new bridge to Thailand. Guerrilla groups still exist. And the United 
States still has an embargo with Vietnam. The U.S. does have 3 State Department officials 
posted there and an MIA staff. U.S aid is going through NGO's. Many Americans still remember 
the war and are still fighting it. Laos does not have Most Favored Nation status with the U.S.and 
no OPIC agreement. There have been questions of human rights violations in both countries. 
Prostitution and drugs are real problems. Inflation, population and unemployment are growing 
and services are almost nonexistent in some areas. Class lines are evident and government 
services declining. Bribes are not uncommon. Rice production has, however, risen. Vietnam is 
13th in the world in population , 3rd in rice production and has the lowest amount of arable land 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690364 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 0 3 6 4 Fl ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690364 Date: 07/22/2021 
in SE Asia. Protecting the environment has not been a priority. Women have also taken an active 
role and March 8th is celebrated as Women's Day. Some government officials also still seem 
suspect of the U.S. While all the rest of the developed world is barging into the growing 
Southeast Asia economy, the U.S. may soon be left out. In Vientiane the first American business 
was started by a woman interested in developing Laotian textiles. Textiles are Laos' major 
export. Since then only a limited number of businesses have been organized by foreigners. 
Technical assistance is imperative, besides financial. But it will be up to these countries to 
decide their futures and what they want. I believe it is time our President äcted with financial 
and technical aid. Exchange of scholars and other Fulbright type programs should be increased. I 
suspect all this will change over the next year, and these countries will become part of the boom 
in Asia. 
Katie Holmes 
© 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690364 Date: 07/22/2021