[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 0 1 4 u .S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690014 Date: 07/22/2021 
L'.vorn rmun lu seueogretv,, r.d? 
N PVI:p1  .4 1.0 N A_ L 
TIME, JANUAR9 10, 1949 
# 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Libyas fol world citizenship. A bib tna 
with a toothbrush mustaae aid an Ames 
icaa accent was saying: •1 think./ wa 
,born in lifolland—I think so, mind you. 
Another young. maa, vay dark and M 
shaven, introduced himself to mt aisply 
"I am the French press attaché of thi 
movement. I was appointed only yester day, so dun is ads I an tell you abou Gary Davis. However, Ian tell mu lo 
about the Traskyists, with whom I ma 
to bave iinnerous affiliations." 
Hardheaded observers are tempted tc 
piponbole Davis and his discipks as 
bunch of &placed sophomores, long 
haired faddists and tea-party intemation• 
Can Dens & ra Pans 
Big eases mid blind knging. 
Istemationoi 
IDEOLOGIES alias. And so, to a considerable atent, 
they are. But they sre mon. Th ey are 
• Tha Lath Man . . amp . managers of a well-man* but 
dangerous and.kresponalls force. What tbe DN. Amenably opened its 
*serious in Park lost September, young - Alt W.C.F.A. Davis banana and 
Garry Davie onetime limotherni gedei- untidy toom—No. e--on the secontl door 
bout. wartime bomber pilot and we of of the Rotel des Etats-Unis, down a cor-
seekey  sakdfradea liner  Deviant=  ridor that Is redolent with the smell of 
=eat&  fr eak who  campe d eit the stale fried potatoes. He tanks these at a 
ILN.'s doorstep, heckled im delibitaa- Plain wooden tank  hewed with tYt*
times. A saltsledased citizen of the 440sid script. He is the head of the "Association 
• wfras awasse ,..4 iss us .r,,....ert  for the International Registry of World 
be ',m i .,' ijaae-acii n is,;:e..•,‘  Als, kn . _.;atians ancl People's Assenisly." His ad-
-. ireds lie werthe hader offi - ' iiii,•;:ibilrest etirrance they sre lefice—call 
War neeieepliitigtoss.''' _ex =  e a.,•oltissili- tame. In the so-year-old. 
Anne .. n a_ - =min i carrot-topped, pleasant, sbmwd and slight-.. 
• i&iitiPieisiiTzatarert; traits Paris Be- ly corny Air Forca veteran they profess 
an Chief Andre Lamerre cabled: to see an authentic symbol of a scared and 
muddled generation. Wu intellectual bap 
At the reception desk of the sleazy, Left gage may be desiped for air travel, but 
Bank HAW des Etats-IThis, a young Ger- Carty Davis is no dops. He bas a Clear, man wat explaining that be bad come army mind which constantly surprkes bis from Munkh to see BM Davis. A beard- intellectual French colleagues. He used. to 
ed Italian brandished a theif of men: te a pbyboy, but now he abstains from They wen, be said, the applications of n sin' aft* &inks nothing sumer than 
• 21 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690014 Date: 07/22/2021