[Page 1]
C O6 6 9 4 714 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019 
DIST: 
10/28 
TD 
D 
P 
E 
T 
M 
G 
AF 
INR 
ID 
PM 
S/P 
AID 
S/S 
FAXED TO SECRETARY 
CECRET/NODIS 
DECL: OADR 
TO: The Secretary 
FROM: Strobe Talbott 
SUBJECT: Trip Report 
DECAPTIONED 
NODIS CHANNEL 9424735 
United States Department of State 
The Deputy Secretary of State 
Washington, D.C. 20520 
October 28, 1994 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
George Moose, Doug Bennet, John Hicks (of AID) and I have just 
completed our six-nation trip to Africa, and I wanted to pass along 
some impressions. Given Tony's interest in Africa -- and his 
likely proximity to you aboard Air Force One -- you might want to 
share this with him. I'll see that Brian Atwood gets a copy as 
well. 
The trip was, in a word, terrific. I come home feeling really 
quite optimistic about the Continent, at least over the long haul, 
and also gratified about our policy in very immediate and palpable 
terms. In the U.S., we're bombarded with the worst images of 
Africa as a hellhole cursed with AIDS, corruption, famine and 
genocide. Being there for a week has given me an appreciation of 
several important positive developments that offset the stereotypes 
as well as the very real problems and catastrophes. 
Democracy is definitely taking hold in many parts of Africa 
(26 countries have had multiparty elections since 1989 and 12 more 
countries will have them by 1996). Having, en route to Africa, 
given a speech on democracy as the wave of the future, I had the 
exhilarating experience of discovering that what I had been saying 
in the rarified atmosphere of Oxford seems actually to be true --
and in a particularly troubled part of the world. Moreover, a 
number of key states, including Ghana, Zimbabwe and Uganda, have 
had substantial economic,growth over several years. 
We found that the U.S. is getting quite a bit of credit for 
the favorable trends. It was gratifying, for example, to hear 
President Mugabe of Zimbabwe thank the U.S. for providing 
leadership on the sanctions that were key to the end of apartheid. 
The foreign minister of Malawi expressed gratitude for our having 
linked economic assistance and good governance in his country. He 
credits this sort of "principled conditionality" for having 
practical effect: it helped induce Hastings Banda finally to step 
down and yield to a multiparty democracy. Malawi's president 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
5/8/2019 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 2]
6 6 94 714 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019 
--fteRET/NODIS 
-2-
thanked us for leading the international effort to get food aid 
there in response to a potentially devasting drought. And almost 
everyone we talked to hailed our policy in Haiti -- both in its 
own right and because of what they see as its implications for 
Africa and the globe. 
The most upbeat part of the trip was Southern Africa. Just 
as the U.S. is adjusting to the combination of opportunities and 
complications that comes with the post-Cold War era, so Zimbabwe 
and Malawi -7 like the big boy on the block, South Africa -- are 
moving into the post-apartheid era. The consequences of the 
collapse of apartheid are as profound in Southern Africa as those 
of the collapse of communism are in Europe. 
There has been a tectonicTshift-in-relationships among 
neighboring countries. Until recently, for example, Zimbabwe and 
Malawi were on opposite sides of a great divide. Zimbabwe, under 
Mugabe, was a leader of the Front Line States in theIoho 
struggle against white rule. Malawi, -under -fbe thirty yéar reign 
of Banda, was regarded as a toady and apologist for South Africa, 
hence treated as a kind of co-pariah -in -Ehe -re4I6n .:  Now, -nOt - , , 
only is South Africa a multiracial democracy, but Malawi itself 
has, in the past year, held open elections and_convened a real
parliament. Along with Zimbabwe and eight: Othe -r.SOuthern  Aftican 
countries, South Africa and Malawi are seeking to combine their 
efforts in pursuit of economic devefopment, regional itability --
and democracy. 
- Wf,PK !:445. 01 At the same time, the end of Cold-Wai7makes_it:easier'fof.
these nations to get on with basic:galt al ne :67c6nOmic  
restructuring. ' There are few echoe -S- 6f — "Afri -dah - ttitiaiist" 
ideology in the rhetoric we heard. No longer can these .leade,rs _ _,
play for their own advantage in the_superpowef coMiieflficin; 
by the same token, are we in the poST -ticiii7bf iiijiprayooToif -iii 
regional games against a global cotiii*faZi' -:-- 'IrigteTcr,± 
again in our meetings, Zimbabwean and 
in down-to-earth terms about how t6-.4et. — 
Southern Africa is clearly feeIiiig7faifdife --frOgra -critiC -al----' ' 
ioilmass of democratization in the reg : working _ - 
together to secure peace in Mozambi4Lfe 'Arigola not -only to - - 
increase regional security, but also to_ consolidate their own 
democratic gains. 
Mugabe is a telling case. He'had -been a -Markist all -his ---  - 
life. He still thinks that socialiSt iS more kigHt -Ehaniwrong 
and that capitalism is more wrong than right. But he's also a 
democrat and a pragmatist, and he presides over a country that 
has a vigorous market economy and a reasonable degree of 
political freedom and openness. He has also adjusted to/the idea 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 3]
C O 6 6 9 4 714 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019 
--SBeRgP/NODIS 
-3-
that American influence and power can.actually.be.a-benevolent 
influence. It was stunning to hear someone of his background 
offer even a qualified compliment on the restoration of Aristide: 
"We say congratulations to you for succeeding without fighting to 
send him home." 
As a result of these developments, the conditions are right 
for the growth of some new multilateral regional institutions and 
the invigoration of some existing ones. The U.S. can help 
sponsor those trends without incurring the suspicions and 
resistance that has often attended its efforts in the past. 
Within the region, the key outfit is theSouthern African
Development Community. With the addition of South Africa, SADC 
is in the process of transforming the Front Line States (plus-,-
Lesotho, Swaziland and Malawi) into_a_multifaceted_organization 
based on shared values and interests,,_which„for_theimost_part _ 
are compatible with our own. South_Africaiwill head,BADC!s---.-
financial sector, while Zimbabwe will_head_the political sector, 
including a still only vaguely defined_bUt,potentially very 
welcome peacekeeping function. - - 
To their credit, SADC leaders.intend_to_maintain_the loose, 
Fnon-bureaucratic structure of the. rontz:Line_ 
much of the decisionmaking has rested on the personal-interaction 
among various Presidents rather thanon.anexpensive, _cumbersome:
secretariat. How SADC will conduct_peacekeeping is not yet 
clear, but a number of ideas -- including formation of a modest 
standing "rapid response force" -- are upderncoAsidexationiii,Both r7r 
Mugabe and Malawian President Muluzirmade,,clear:,th 
place on SADC having real peacekeeping,capability anft.ipdicategl-
they want to move quickly to reach cc5ripppslis,witAin„thp, ,,----,-- ,.. 
organization on the modalities. 
SADC has already scored a small'but m. gli?,:facant-vjctory-i-n- •  
crisis-prevention and the defense or,,4006cta 
Mugabe, Mandela and Botswanan President,Ilasire_joinedforces,on .
SADC's behalf to convince the Lesothb monarb* tb reverse its 
attempt to disband the elected parliament _-_-. 
Mozambique is SADC's next target -: -While we_yere_in_the: --
area, .SADC summoned representatives_of—the_Mozambicanjactions to 
Harare to discuss recent, alarming dévelopments (e.g., the 
discovery of arms caches on both sides) . SADC's message was 
simple and direct: make the upcoming ele.ctions workv,.,theLlosers 
must accept the verdict of the people, and-the-winners-must not 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 4]
C O 6 6 9 4 714 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019 
-- fteRET/NODIS 
-4-
exploit victory at the cost of national reconciliation. (As you 
and I discussed, George Moose, once he completes his current 
visit to Mali and Niger, will go to Maputo to reiterate that 
message.) 
SADC also has its eye on Angola. In Zimbabwe and Malawi we 
heard considerable skepticism that the current deal between the 
government and UNITA will hold. We pledged to work closely with 
SADC, and with the British who are also concerned, to ensure that 
the signing of the accords yields quickly to an agreement among 
the parties for its speedy and effective implementation --
including agreement on when and how to deploy the UN force. 
When we asked about active South African involvement in 
regional peacekeeping operations, we got an interesting answer, 
The Zimbabwean Foreign Minister noted-that- Mandela has -committed--
to send peacekeepers to Angola, but-only.as part_of a SADC joint • 
force. As Mandela made clear when he was,in the U..S., South _
Africa will participate, but only_within_regional and subregional 
groupings. This Suits the other SADC countries just - fine in -that-
it protects against the real or perceived chance of South Africa 
becoming the local hegemon and it_also_serves_to strengthen SADC. 
Clearly in the case of Angola, everyone -- including the South 
Africans -- realizes that it would not serve_the cause.of- peace.-
for South Africa to participate on-A.tsown-..,,. 
This is good news for another i—global.reason_as-well. -It 
provides one more good example for-.us to_point to,in.our,ongoing 
effort to debunk the tempting but-iperniciousjdea,,of "spheresof,_ 
influence peacekeeping." More speci-fically7,At—gives-us::a: . 
talking point to use with Moscow ini,discouraglngunilateralist : 
tendencies in the "near abroad." .. . 
Our delegation's message at every:Stopalong;the,way,in,-, TT
Africa was the importance of regional and subregional 
peacekeeping. The regional organization,: :of-._..course.;:-is -the7OAU,=_ . 
about which we heard little good. ._,Both.in-.Southern and7West, .. 
Africa, the attitude of our interlocutorsr,toward their.
Continent's one comprehensive bodT2rangedfrom - indifferenceto 7,,, 
disappointment to contempt. Nonetheless, q-dont-think we_should,__ - 
write off the OAU completely. It has recently shown signs that 
it too is adjusting to Africa's new realities;_for_example., it 
has recently declared an interest_dn_setting::_up=Its:town=conflict---
resolution mechanism. We're providing-some..modest support.for.. 
this initiative. Salim Salim wants. to do the right thing. .Weill 
just have to see whether, with a little helprfrom.us,-the,OAU,,--
gains any heft and muscle. 
Our impression of subregional peacekeeping is more 
favorable, but still mixed. Having heard basically good news 
about SADC in Southern Africa, we found (as we expected) the 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 5]
C O 6 6 9 4 714 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019 
SECRET/NODIS 
-5-
situation in Central Africa to be anything but encouraging. Our 
brief stops in Burundi and Zaire -- two nations that border on 
Rwanda -- made it all too clear that there is, for all intents 
and purposes, no subregional mechanism whatsoever for dealing 
with that ongoing horror. 
However, George Moose and John Hicks note that the Inter-
Governmental Authority for Drought and Development (IGAD --
Somalia, Ethiopia, Sudan, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Djibouti and 
Eritrea) has already begun to branch out into conflict resolution 
in Sudan. IGAD is receptive to expanding both its membership 
(Rwanda and Burundi would be candidates) and its role in 
peacekeeping so we are now looking at using Brian Atwood's Horn 
of Africa initiative to encourage and.support IGAD as the 
regional institution of choice to promote East/Central African 
stability and development. - - 
In West Africa, Liberia is the obvious preoccupation. Not.
only has the war inflicted prolonged_misery upon,that_country-, it 
has exacted a heavy toll -- in terms of refugees, social - 
disruption, and economic drain -- on neighboring countries that 
can ill afford such burdens. Many of our interlocuters stressed - 
that Liberia has become a test case for African peacekeepingu-not-_,
only in the West African region, but,_also throghouthe,_:_: _ . 
Continent. The current effort is-in_the_:_hands_,primarily_of,_the_ 
Economic Community of West Africa (ECOWAS), but the Liberia 
venture has bogged down and may be falling apart.- -If it-fails,---
African governments will no doubt be_reluctant to try ,such, 
intercession again. 
LA •4• a • - .•
In looking closely at ECOWASpapti-ihistOxy,i it,is_tmptjmg 
to focus on its manifold problems , 
Anglophone nations, primarily Nigeria and Ghana (igho bear the 
brunt of the military effort in Liberia,),„and.p.11Francophone-, 
ones (who have committed few troopsLig“degp an0 
•' 
And no one is more emotionallppithatany p.tW 
than Jerry Rawlings, the President,.oi:Ohana;„_whocoTpiains,tfiat,-,.-,. 
4 -he might as well not bother talkingrto:hOrancpphonerneighbors 
since they just parrot the line of,:ntheir:masters im=baiis,". —- - 
Tensions are also growing between._Efie7An4b4hones_Rawlin48_, „ 
accused the Nigerians of conducting,a_yendettal,againt-Liberian 
Warlord Charles Taylor rather than trying to:bring,-him-into the 
tent with the other faction leaders.„.,,,i 7 
. 
Rawlings, by the-way, is, all by. himself, a trip...Our two, , 
sessions with him -- a raucous, utterly nonlinear, but 
intellectually stimulating and politically useful 90-minute 
harangue one afternoon, followed by a one-on-one I had with him 
the next day at the airport -- were in some ways the high points 
of the trip if only because they were so totally, 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 6]
C O 6 6 9 4 714 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019 
--&BGRET/NODIS 
-6-
surrealistically unlike anything else I've ever experienced (or 
even heard of) in diplomacy. He's as smart as he can be, but 
just about the most idiosyncratic, iconoclastic "statesman" I've 
ever encountered. One minute, he is communicating throughhis.
own aides, turning his back on his guests and referring to them 
in the third person ("How are we going to get through to these 
people?"); then, suddenly, he swings on you, locks his gaze on 
your eyes, grabs your arms or your knee, calls you "chief," and 
works himself to the brink of tears, only to throw his head back 
and roar with laughter. I think he needs a little time with you 
to iron out the fine points of diplomatic discourse. 
Rawlings is a self-styled Third World folk hero, a 
swashbuckling bearded revolutionary7turned-populist/proto- . 
democrat. He's given us fits over,the years—At one.point_in 
the 80s, he (along with his eminen0=grisp, the intelligence 
chief, an African clone of Che Guevara) recruited a CIA agent in 
Ghana as a double agent and ran her againstius„Rawlings_could 
very well have turned Ghana into a_l!rogue_state,!!„-emulating-.his 
erstwhile pals Gaddafi and Castro and Kim Il Sung. But instead, 
he decided some time ago that that=way lay. disaster. So instead 
he embarked on essentially the riglit_coimse.:Tarkets, elections, 
fairly free press. 
He's also tried to play a constructive role=on-regional,—:,- 
peacekeeping. He's now the chairman7of_the ECOWAS and may
breathe new life into both the organization-and-its-Liberian----
intervention. Our judgment is that,„more,than_any.of the other_ _._ 
parties to the Liberian conflict, Wawlings,has-the most promising 
approach -- which isn't saying a whole lot, but we definitely 
think his is better than the Nigerians',_ we. yant to_encouragp, 
and perhaps even find ways to supporthirrL ,But1Whati.sfreally.
striking is that he wants us to weigh.immith;.ourmilitaryl-Tower;_„, 
:ury i/. ; 141; Z ,j) 
Again, as with Mugabe, I cite„thisas,_,an:iexampleof,,how.the,.. 
psychology of the leaders in the area has changed. Here is 
someone who, all his life, has been deeply suspiciousand---,LT----::_-,—
resentful of American power -- but,who nowwantsaT,littleofr,s1rj,::. 
precisely that stuff sprinkled over,his,nei4hborhood,T
- - 
We had a fascinating conversation_with'Rawlidgs_about:Eaiti_.— -74 -7 
Clearly, he'd been glued to the tube-on,September-19.„zyatching, 
CNN's.Haiti show. He was awed byAhe:spectaple-o-f-the-U.S..---- -7- : Z 
gunships coming into Port-au-Prince,:,"I2don't disagree with your 
move into Haiti... You've gained lots of credibility," he said. 
Coming from him, that's quite an endorsegtentHe's still., 
ambivalent. He admonished us not to.be so Reavy7handed but said 
he thought the American capacity for "a more subtle kind of 
intimidation" -- and, specifically, a few helicopters like the 
ones that sent Cedras and Biamby packing -- could make all the 
difference in Liberia ("If you don't want to fly them, you could 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 7]
C O 6 6 9 4 714 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019 
SECRBT/NODIS 
-7-
just loan them to us"). 
He sees our Administration as having a chance to recapture 
the kind of respect that American power enjoyed in Africa and the-
Third World during what he characterized as "the Kennedy-Carter 
period." As he put it, especially with the end of the Cold War, 
"you can make us love you as well as respect you... But you've 
got to do it in a way that makes clear you respect us." 
Anyway, moving from inside his head back to the situation on 
the ground: the picture is not entirely bleak. ECOWAS is on the 
ropes in Liberia but not out of the ring. As chairman of the 
grouping, Rawlings may, conceivably, be able to turn-the 
situation around. An ECOWAS success_would_show that_regional 
peacekeeping can work in Africa and.elsewhere.--
The challenge of course is making dt work -- and here 'we 
must begin with a hard look at our_owu.assumptions_and actions 
regarding African peacekeeping. In_the.first of our two highly 
theatrical meetings with Rawlings, he_argued that it is . . 
hypocritical for the U.S. to pressure ECOWAS.to resolve the 
Liberian conflict, but then shrink_from_providing the-resources 
that would allow it to succeed. Rawling complains that we should 
provide more bilateral military aid (Flight Lieutenant that he 
is, he has helicopters for Ghana particularly-in.mind)_-so that-.- ---
his country can be a more effective peacekeeper; he also wants us- - 
to provide more aid to regional peacekeeping,,operations as _such. 
From his perspective, the effect of our.exhortations combined 
with the lack of assistance is to undermine such.efforts 
At the same time, he also opposes,turning,the_114iberta,effoM 
over to the UN. In his view, that letantamount_to:declaring 
regional peacekeeping in West Africa &Ifailure;and would,Juxther. 
emasculate ECOWAS as an organization. What he wants is our help 
in ensuring ECOWAS succeeds in Liberia 77_not iustso:that_,rhis r 
chairmanship will be judged a success,,-,but,-soithat_the.,„ . 
organization will be strengthened, bot,h_for.:future.peacekeeping 
and as a force for integration of the neighborhood,-,-_.„ 
particularly across Anglophone-Francophone lines.-i 
George, Doug and I have spent quite.a,bit,of,time_talking 
about what we should do. Without by anymeans-endorsing_all. his - 
requests or proposals, we still think:we:should.step up our - . 
interaction with Rawlings (and not lust_so that-wecan have: more—
wild and crazy get-togethers with him). His commitment to 
solving the Liberian dilemma is, we think,T :quite genuine„ Wp_.-
conspired usefully with him on how to press.-the Ivoirians to take 
a major role in reviving the diplomatic process over Liberia. 
With the right constellation of pressures on the Liberian 
warlords from other states, Rawlings said he would be willing to 
call a new peace conference among all the key players in the 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 8]
C O 6 6 9 4 714 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019 
SECRET/NODIS 
-8-
conflict (including new Liberian factions). 
What we heard at our next stop, in Cote d'Ivoire, made us 
feel that Rawlings is indeed on the right track. The Ivorians 
are not just Francophone -- they're Franco-besotted. One gets 
the impression their worldview, along with their table manners 
and everything else, is made, and regularly checked, in Paris. 
And Mother France doesn't want her children playing with guns; 
she prefers to step in and take care of things herself lest her 
charges get too good at fending for their own security needs and 
tell her to kiss off. We did get the feelingi_however, that with 
some additional prodding from us and their neighbors, Cote 
d'Ivoire might play a more active diplomatic role. 
Some miscellaneous notes: 
-- The Malawian Foreign Minister, Edward Bwanali, is 
extremely impressive. With six months.oLpractice_as_a democrat -- - 
under his belt, he is a great spokesmanfor_the-three-reinforcing 
pillars of our Africa policy: democracy, -peace-and-prosperity..—
He makes the case most eloquently-that,the three must go -hand in:-, 
hand -- lose any one and prospects- for-the other-two suffer.:. 
really like to get Bwanali to thelT,S.-and-have-him venture=out-
on the Council on Foreign Relationsrtype-
USIA. An invitation from you for,him:to2.-visitl_the_Uf.,S_Jfor-talks_,_ 
would get him as far as DC at his governMent'sexpense._ He'd_pay 
a courtesy call on you, then George-and-I-would=da-__some_more,=_-
business with him before Joe Duffy_would_take_over_his.program__ 
Maybe this will do a bit to help forrAfrica!,s-.dreadfuland--,c,e 
undeserved image. 
-- I have only one regret about-thisitrip.d.% that Iididn':t tbai. 
bring along a Pentagon military officer,;:We:,wouldhave benefited 
from that perspective in our teamand.it-would=have,sent atgood. 
signal about our seriousness to ourLhost_ev:ir,1 nusnrememberl-, --
whenever possible to include our uniformed-ifriends,f-romaoross-,,,,,,--- 
the river. 7;7 
f2 
-- We picked up a lot of evidence that;weandi-the,Frencht,incc,phur,
are operating on the basis of not just different but 
diametrically opposed strategies and philosophies,,about i7:1131e.'
We're committed to democracy as a necesSary.(-.:--houot: _ _ _ • 
necessarily sufficient) condition for:developmentand-stability;. 
France has a far more paternalistic471,;:e-;,,---,patronizing and. 
cyncial, view. I want to talk this.through with Peter-.Tarnoff on.-
my return, to see if we can keep our,differences1Jrom.getting,ue-
crosswise with each other on specific_crises like-Rwanda-and. , 
Liberia. 
-- I gather there is some thought that President Clinton 
might visit Africa next year. It won't surprise you to hear 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019

[Page 9]
C O 6 6 9 4 714 ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019 
SECRET/NODIS 
-9-
that, after my experience, I fully suppoiC that- idea. And 
beware: I'll probably become a pest about how he should visit 
Ghana and take on Rawlings up close and-personal. 
3 ,N Cr, 
A't=e: tha5 -1:7; 
_ _ ne . tnil r 
.3 'IL; i c44. F!Li;v 72 jj,  11 
; 
J.I. J_ Lit ot i)K!±-
-ri • Anti:- s 
Ix: "1-.C-..k 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694714 Date: 05/29/2019