[Page 1]
CO 6 6 9 012 TIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690127 Date: 06/16/2021 
Thomas Mann Allee 2/11 
8000 Munich 80 Germany 
Wednesday March 17 1993 
Dear Strobe, RELEASE IN FULL 
Your Feb. 28 letter arrived today - most welcome! 
Thanks... the sooner you get confirmed the better. History 
is moving awfully fast in our favorite place -- in the wrong 
direttion. I think Yeltsin is at the edge of the abyss -- if 
not out over it -- and so is the Khasbulatov crowd. I don't 
see how the "government" keeps functioning. 
Our situation is similar: we are either at the edge of 
the abyss or out over it. Maybe we can scramble back, I 
don't know. But the truth is, the Radios deserve to live. I 
can't say that strongly enough. There is no doubt that they 
can be made much leaner, more efficient and less costly - but 
they truly should stay alive. 
It seems to me a nightmarish situation. The President 
wants to create the energized, engaged foreign policy with 
Russia that we all have dreamed of while at the same time, 
his Administration wants to silence the most widely familiar, 
most trusted part of the American presence in the CIS. Ask 
anyone you trust or admire - from Slava L., to Lukin, to 
Mikhail Sergeyich - about silencing Radio Free Europe/Radio 
Liberty. They will tell you it must not happen. How can we 
get this perception to the President? 
The Radios are perhaps more important now than during 
the Cold War. The economic and political collapse has left 
everyone's compass in the CIS spinning in every sphere of 
their lives. Amidst the turmoil, we speak to millions of 
listeners in the new nations in their own languages, 
reporting their news in dispassionate, balanced, "Western" 
terms. The broadcasts are crucial links in communicating 
with the democratic activists. These people don't listen to 
VOA - its programming is largely irrelevant to their needs, 
as credible surveys in recent years show. Most people I have 
spoken with in trips through the CIS consider VOA to be 
Washington's radio; and that Svoboda is their radio. If the 
U.S. walks away from us, the only people who will applaud 
(aside from Tom Korologos and Russell Feingold) will be the 
Zhirinovskis of the anti-Semitic ultra-right, the Pamyat 
fascists and the goons of the National Salvation Fkont, and 
their East European counterparts (the nationalist press in 
Romania is already hailing the demise of RFE). 
The President is exactly right - stability and political 
reform in the former Soviet lands is vital to U.S. national 
security interests. But if the United States is really going 
to recast its CIS foreign policy, the President, Tony Lake 
and Warren Christopher, et. al., must accept what you and I 
already know to be true: that the key to changing the future 
of the empire is not money, but ideas. It is absurd to talk 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690127 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 69 0 12 7 1FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690127 Date: 06/16/2021 
about spending billions in techno/monetary/self-help projects 
when the transformation must occur within peoples' breasts. 
"Hearts and minds" is no joke. Millions of people are 
willing to participate in the formation of moderating ideas 
about where their societies should go. In making•relevant 
ideas available to moderates across the broken empire, no 
American organization is in closer touch with more people 
than Radio Liberty - period. Those most devastated and most 
put at risk by shutting us would be the very people the 
President most wants to assist - the democratic forces. The 
news from Moscow this past week suggests how difficult the 
future might be. 
Meanwhile, as I wrote you last month, the economic 
collapse has had a terrible impact on media there. In many 
ways, CIS countries are more cut off now from each other and 
the world outside than when Moscow ruled. The isolation 
could hardly have come at a worse time - when new nations 
must forge peaceful bonds with each other while struggling to 
build stable economies and civil, democratic societies This 
is a dangerous moment for an information gap out there. We 
fill the gap. No one else can because no one else has our 
independence, credibility, depth and commitment. 
We do cross-reporting among capitals, conduct on-air 
regional roundtables, always showing the civilizing role of 
free speech. We are the switchboard for the CIS, plugging 
them into their own world and the world beyond - just as the 
Ukrinform chief told me. My stringer networks include scores 
of regular contributors. We produce reliable news from 
around the countryside, but we also are America's cheapest 
CIS journalism school, graduating seasoned reporters into the 
domestic media. (VOA has actually cut its Ukrainian 
broadcast, from 5 hours in 1984 to 2 hours now. This while 
Ukraine was born into the world as an impoverished, 
politically unstable, nation of 52 million, armed with enough 
nukes to vaporize most of Europe. And the new administration 
wants to shut us?) 
The Clinton proposal would zero out the RFE/RL operating 
budget in FY 96 - 2 years from now, and "consolidate" 
whatever useful assets there are into USIA. That will mean 
the end of our kind of operation - Radio Liberty cannot exist 
as a government-run broadcast operation. Independence from 
government lies at the heart of what we do. 
Our credibility is unique because our listeners know we 
are independent from government control -- listeners who are 
sensitized to this issue because their own media were 
poisoned for decades by government/party penetration and 
influence. To someone like me, who spent four years in 
Moscow, or Gene Pell, the RFE/RL president who was NBC Moscow 
correspondent for three years, or Bob Gillette, who runs RFE 
and who spent nearly seven years in Moscow and Warsaw for the 
LA Times, this is a fundamental issue. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690127 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 69 012 7 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690127 Date: 06/16/2021 
I've been writing our older son, Brennan, who lives in 
Moscow, about our unexpected problems. (He represents 
Russian scientists to U.S. businesses - a tale for another 
time!) He just sent me an e-mail from his Academy of 
Sciences apartment out near Ulitsa 26 Bakinskii Kommissarov. 
I was floored by what he said. Here's some of it: 
(Re my view that the Radios aren't "surrqgates", but partners 
with the democratic forces): 
"Sure, it's a partnership -- with the people of Ukraine 
and White Russia and all the' broadcast countries. It is not 
a soft or friendly partnership. -- it is blunt, direct, 
objective journalism. Always good-natured, as journalists 
are -- but the reason that American journalists are such a 
great bunch of people, like you and Craig Whitney and Bradlee 
and Gene Pell and the Dobbses -- is that you know you are 
FREE to write as you please and AS YOU SEE IT. This is a 
very liberating thing. Dad, your whole crowd (US 
journalists) breathe fresh air all the time. 
"The new free countries need partnership with the old 
free countries. But they don't need pap and propaganda. 
Their governments treated them like children before. They 
need adult medicine, bitter and strong -- a free press, 
market economy. New constitutions and real laws. 
Presidents, not kings -- not politburos. New traditions. 
They need to rise up and overthrow the old tyrants, but not 
in the streets -- in their own hearts. 
"I think Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty are called 
what they're called because the people who founded them knew 
exactly what these stations were for. So don't be afraid to 
call them what they are. Your genre of radio stations are 
free radio stations. Voice of America is the real 
"surrogate" radib station. It's a fake free radio station. 
It ain't free. It's the Voice of the US Govt. Now that's 
not bad -- least worst, Churchill said -- but it isn't the 
real McCoy. You & Bob Gillette & Gene Pell are the real 
McCoy. That's why it's in your radios' names already. 
"And you are the long-term nuclear insurance policy of 
the United States of America. You are an investment for the 
future. You've proved that once already, by helping bring 
down the wall. Now our country has to keep the wall down. 
It will not stay down without the free radios. RL is a life 
insurance policy for our country. You don't cash a policy in 
until it's fully mature. This one ain't mature yet. We're 
in middle age -- all those A-bombs are still out there. 
"Radio Liberty can do this best only if it is free of 
the Government of the United States. It can't be the real 
thing for the nations who need to learn -- unless it is the 
real thing from top to bottom." 
He's 24, and he's lived in Moscow a hell of a lot longer 
than I. My question is: What.can I do to keep RFE/RL alive? 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690127 Date: 06/16/2021