[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 8 6 8 9 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686899 Date: 02/09/2021 
Patient Capital, Inc. Financing for Eastern Europe 
July 31, 1993 
RELEASE IN PART 
B6 
The Honorable Strobe Talbott 
Ambassador at Large for Russia and the former Soviet Republics 
The White House 
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue 
Washington, D.C. 
Dear Mr. Talbott: 
Thank you for the opportunity to introduce you to Patient Capital, Inc. Our 
mission is to assist in the democratization and marketization of central and 
eastern Europe by originating and developing profitable strategic investments 
for mutual Eastern and Western benefit. 
Cne important and compelling issue in the former East Bloc is the desperate need 
for thorough re-creation of the financial sector, where existing lending 
Institutions are unable or unwilling to fund even the most promising of private 
transactions. The branches of former statetbanks are almost without exception 
overloaded with debt, yet still actively propping up inefficient state 
enterprises with monies that will likely never be repaid. 
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, begun in April 1991, has 
actively sought investments on market terms to help with the transformation and 
transition of central and eastern Europe into the world economy. Funded by 
capital markets, the EBRD is guaranteed by member countries, including its 
largest shareholder, the United States, which has pledged 10% of total capital. 
The bank has, to its credit, placed a high priority on the rehabilitation of the 
region's financial infrastructure. 
Recently, however, the European Bank has come under incense criticism on a 
variety of fronts. Charges of inappropriate spending, slow lending procedures, 
and transactions that have so far "lacked coherence" have resulted in the 
resignation of the bank's president, Jacques Attali, on June 25, 1993. 
The public debate that rages over the speed and effectiveness of EBRD 
activities is a necessary and even welcome exercise. Yet*much criticism seems 
to overlook or ignore the sheer magnitude of the EBRD's mandate, which is to 
foster market transition and promote private initiative throughout the entire 
former Soviet empire. 
Bank projects in key development sectors such as telecommunications, energy, and 
transportation have begun to make headway in many of the region's economies. 
Yet real rehabilitation of the financial sector has yet to take hold, with the 
result that most new businesses in the region are unable to obtain financing in 
order to grow. Despite the EBRD's efforts in attracting Western banking 
partners, early attempts to create smaller lending institutions have had only 
mixed success, for reasons that are described herein. 
A recent article in The Financial Times raised the question of the European. 
- 1 - 
2018 Hollywood Court, Wilmette, IL 60091 USA / Phone 708-251-7536 / Fax 708-256-7012 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686899 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
C06686899 FIED U.S. DepartmentofState Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686899 Date: 02/09/2021 
Bank's strategic focus (Bank Faces Uphill Fight to Define Way Forward", 
Financial Times, June 26, 1993). While it is true that the nature of the bank's 
activities will naturally be heavily influenced by the choice of Mr. Attali's 
successor; yet The Financial Times, in framing the problem, may have alluded tcr 
a viable way to address the issue of the bank's focus. "Scepticism remains," ' 
authors David Marsh, Chris Boblinski, Judy Dempsey, and Nicholas Denton wrote, 
"whether the EBRD will be able to find a niche in assisting eastern Europe, at a 
time of difficulties for both public sector development institutions and private 
sector banks in the region." 
The enclosed essay takes the Financial Times statement as a point of departure 
and addresses the issue of strategic direction for the European Bank. It makes 
the case for increased emphasis on the part of the EBRD to attract smaller, 
community-oriented banking partners who have particular expertise in lending to 
the same types of businesses that can be found everywhere the entrepreneurial 
spirit sees the light of day: owners and operators driven by the profit motive, 
concerned with cash flow, oriented toward production, and willing to solemnly 
guarantee repayment of loan proceeds, with interest, from the increased revenues 
such borrowings would help to generate. 
A smoothly functioning financial infrastructure has remained out of reach for 
the countries in the EBRD's market area. Yet the creation of well-coordinated 
investment delivery mechanisms in the formerly Soviet-dominated economies 
promises to bring yields far beyond any initial investment costs. Helping 
entrepreneurs find access to much-needed credit can help build businesses, 
create jobs, increase local incomes, and promote the establishment of middle 
classes, thereby solidifying the gains made thus far toward multiparty democracy 
and market reform in central and eastern Europe. 
Patient Capital, Inc. seeks to bring together prospective partners in these 
types of ventures to secure debt and/or equity participation by the European 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development as well as other governmental and 
multilateral agencies and institutions....MrTalbott,__your questions, comments, 
and suggestions based on the enclosed matefiat  - 
Sincerely, 
PATIENT CAPITAL, INC. 
B6 
Jack Sustman 
President 
- 2 - 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686899 Date: 02/09/2021