[Page 1]
C d6 6 9 8 18 7 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019 
United States Department of State
The Deputy Secretary of State 
Washington, D.C. 20520 RELEASE IN FULL 
July 13, 1995 
—SEeftE%/NODIS 
DECL: 07/13/2010
MEMORANDUM FOR: 
FROM: 
SUBJECT: 
DECAPTIONED 
THE PRESIDENT 
THE SECRETARY OF STATE 
Thomas F. McLar 
Strobe Talbot 
Our Trip to South America 
DECLASSIFIED 
Our six-day trip to Argentina, Chile and Brazil provided 
fresh evidence that our Administration's promotion of open 
markets and democracy in the Western Hemisphere is paying off, 
both for our neighbors and for the U.S. All three countries, 
along with others in the region whose leaders we saw at the 
Menem re-inauguration in Buenos Aires, share with,us a strong 
commitment to the goals of strengthening democracy, resolving 
disputes peacefully and integrating economies through expanded 
free trade. We saw and heard dramatic evidence that democracy 
and the liberalization of trade are tOuching people's lives in 
positive ways, especially by generating new jobs. 
The statesmen we met are, on the whole, a remarkably 
impressive lot -- smart, capable, pragmatic, forward-looking, 
principled. In general, they welcome our policies to date, 
look to us for leadership in the future, and deserve our 
continuing support. Alec Watson and Richard Feinberg, who have 
been coming to the region for many years, were struck by how 
much more self-assurance and maturity there is now among its 
leaders; they convey a sense of confidence that, because they 
have cast their lot with economic and political freedom, they 
are on the right side of history. Perhaps largely for that 
reason, they are leaving behind some of the old hangups and 
resentments about Tio Sam. They have an increasing interest in 
playing larger roles on hemispheric and global issues -- and an 
increasing capability to do so. 
--SECRET/NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 2]
C O 6 6 9 818 7:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019 
-SFNERE-T71 NOD I S 
- 2 --
You would both have been gratified to have heard the 
positive way in which our hosts and interlocutors repeatedly, 
referred to the Miami Summit. Even making allowances for 
courtesy, we believe that they look back on that event as an 
historic turning point for the better; it has provided an 
organizing framework for virtually all the nations of the 
hemisphere as we set about trying to reach common objectives. 
The undertone of suspicion and anxiety that we had encountered 
during the walk-up to the Summit has largely given way to 
enthusiasm as they look ahead. Latin American leaders look to 
us for guidance on what the next steps should be, but they are 
also more willing and able to take on responsibility and be 
part of the process themselves. Chilean Foreign Minister 
Insulza spoke for others when he told us that th(V'Summit gave 
coherence and direction to the hemisphere, replacing a sbnse of 
drift that had followed the end of the Cold War. We used our 
discussions to refocus the Miami process on achievable 
medium-term goals, thereby addressing concerns that our 
aggressive pace of summit implementation was overwhelming even 
medium-sized foreign ministries. 
The way in which our Administration handled the Mexican 
peso crisis looks mighty good from where we've just been. 
Mexico's long-term stability -- and the U.S.'s role in rescuing 
it from collapse -- are now almost taken for granted in South 
America. Perhaps that's the highest form of flattery. It also 
borders on complacency, given the social and human costs that 
Mexico will have to.endure as it consolidates its recovery. 
But the Mexican crisis had a sobering effect on much of the 
rest of Latin America; it has reinforced in several countries, 
notably including the three we visited, the need for fiscal 
responsibility and continued commitment to democratization, 
free markets and careful monitoring of capital flows. 
So, all in all, the bottom line of our report to you is 
positive. Our handling of Latin American has added up to a 
quiet though significant foreign-policy success that has opened 
a new and happier chapter in U.S. relations with the hemisphere. 
At the same time, we come home with a heightened awareness 
of the uncertainties and the challenges that cloud an otherwise 
bright southern horizon. The next several months are going to 
be crucial. Clear, consistent American follow-through on our 
initiatives of the last two years -- especially NAFTA and the 
Summit -- could make the difference in keeping the region on a 
steady course. 
Gaining congressional approval of fast-track negotiating 
authority for Chile's accession to NAFTA should continue to be 
a priority objective. This is, truly, a make-or-break 
challenge for us; it will require the same sort of commitment 
SECARTiNODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 3]
C O6 6 9 8 1 8 7 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019 
SE T/NODIS 
and exertion as GATT. Chile fast-track is key to sustaining 
momentum toward the Summit's goal of a Free Trade Agreement for 
the Americas by 2005, and it will assure the success of the 
next trade ministerial, in Cartagena next March. 
More generally, by enabling Chile to accede to NAFTA, we 
will be affirming our determination to remain fully engaged in 
Latin American and Caribbean affairs. This issue will be seen 
as a test of our Administration's ability to pursue its agenda 
in a difficult domestic political environment. A setback or an 
open-ended delay would be much more than a big disappointment 
for Chile -- it would be a blow to our credibility and 
influence throughout the region. Over the past several years, 
we've given constant assurances that Miami was npt a'one-time 
thing; that we'd make sure it led to concrete, lasting-and 
institutipnalized progress. Our friends in the region are 
watching us closely on this one. If we lose this one, we could 
cede leadership on trade to Brazil and MERCOSUR -- and lose 
American jobs as a result. 
Counternarcotics figured prominently in our discussions 
with Presidents Samper of Colombia and Sanchez de Lozada of 
Bolivia. Both seem to be taking very seriously our urgings --
and their responsibilities. (On Samper, we're still from 
Missouri -- and_he knows it. Our message to him was: "We like 
what we've seen so far, Ernesto, but show us more.") We heard 
in Santiago that as the Colombian authorities crack down more 
effectively on the narcos, some traffickers and processors are 
moving their operations into Chile -- a reminder that this is 
truly a hemispheric problem, requiring concerted efforts by all 
of us. 
If Colombia and Bolivia continue to make progress on drugs, 
as we expect they will, we should look for ways to broaden our 
agenda with both of them. That in itself will be an inducement 
for further progress. As President Sanchez de Lozada put it, 
"the de-narcofication of Bolivia's relationship with the U.S. 
will be a reward to us." Our active support for, and 
high-level participation in, the Cartagena trade ministerial 
next march and the sustainable development Summit in Santa 
Cruz, Bolivia later next year, will help in this regard. We 
hope it will be possible for the Vice President to attend the 
Santa Cruz meeting. His being there will be a magnet for 
others to come. We should also be imaginative and vigorous in 
mobilizing support and involvement of other governments and 
also the private sector in that project. 
Our discussions in Buenos Aires, Santiago and Brasilia 
sensitized us to the need to be realistic --and sometimes 
restrained -- in the way we calibrate our pressure on the South 
American leaders: Samper and Sanchez de Lozada on drugs; Menem 
SE T/NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 9 8 1 8 7 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019 
T/NODIS 
- 4 - 
on intellectual property rights; Cardoso of Brazil on open 
markets and economic integration; and Frei of Chile on rule of 
law, which is an especially delicate subject at the moment, 
since the Chilean courts are trying to bring to justice the 
Pinochet-era military officers who masterminded the 
Letelier/Moffitt murders. 
In all these cases, not only are H.S. objectives right, but 
we're pursuing them on the basis of a broadening and deepening 
consensus within the hemisphere. These leaders want to move in 
the direction we are urging them to -- and they want to do that 
because of their own vision, not just because of our 
exhortations and pressure. However, we must be careful not to 
overplay our hand -- and inadvertently weaken thpirs in the 
process. We heard this cautionary message most forcefully from 
the private sector representatives with whom we met in Sao 
Paulo, Brazil, but it was echoed elsewhere, and it is supported 
by our own analysis. These are, after all, democratically 
elected presidents whose countries are still undergoing 
difficult transitions from authoritarianism. They are subject 
to complex and conflicting forces from powerful constituencies, 
ranging from labor unions in Argentina that are not happy about 
the prospect of 18% unemployment to Pinochet himself, who is 
still adjusting to the jailing of his fellow officers, in Chile. 
Most of the leaders with whom we met are proving their 
credentials as free-market democrats and their commitment to 
the right policies on the tough issues. Sanchez de Lozada, for 
example, has a strategic vision for Bolivia that, over time, 
addresses the drug problem. Through a bold campaign of 
"capitalization" (his version of privatization) and development 
of the country's energy resources, he hopes to lift the 
peasantry out of poverty and coax it,away from its reliance on 
illicit coca and poppy growing. There are limits to how far we 
can push him on drug eradication, especially when we no longer 
have the resources to help him buy off the growers. Sanchez de 
Lozada acknowledges that by decertifying his country and 
granting him a national-interest waiver, with the threat of 
full decertification if he failed to meet certain conditions by 
June 30, we made it possible for him.to take stern 
counter-narcotics measures; but pushing him too hard could 
bring him to brink of the politically suicidal. 
Argentina, too, requires special care. Menem is determined 
to consolidate democracy, keep open markets and fight the good 
fight against hyperinflation. However, the social costs of 
fiscal austerity are severe; corruption is the object of 
popular anger. The Argentine banking system is still not fully 
sound, even though it's well back from the brink on which it 
was tottering four months ago. Finance Minister Cavallo is 
deservedly respected, but Jim Cheek believes that infighting 
and jealousy are closer to the surface now than they were 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 5]
C06698187 =ED U.S. DepartmentofState Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019 
j.weiwrf/NODIS 
— 5 — 
during the first Menem term. For all these reasons, we should 
be careful, as we consider whether to apply sanctions as an 
anti-dumping measure or in pursuit of intellectual property 
rights, that we don't give Menem more troubles than he can 
manage. 
We would like to share with you a personal observation 
about Menem. We sensed some fatigue in what we've know to be a 
high-energy personality. He was, of course, in his inaugural 
mode, and that might partially explain why he seemed subdued. 
But he was noticeably less energetic than when he visited 
Washington a year ago. This is, no doubt, at least in part 
because he is still grieving for his only son, who died in an 
airplane crash earlier this year. (He was gratefel for your' 
personal expressions of condolences, Mr. Presideht.) 
Our trip confirmed that Brazil is, in many ways, the single 
most important country in the area because of its size, 
population and economy. The Brazilians are going to have a 
major impact on how successful we are in pursuing odr own 
agenda in the region. That is hopeful news, since their agenda 
is beginning to converge with ours. The U.S. and Brazil are 
emerging from several decades of testiness. In part that's 
because of the end of the Cold War, when Yanqui-bashing was 
fashionable in Brazil. But the other major positive factor is 
the arrival on the scene of President Cardoso, who, as a former 
Marxist intellectual and leader of the opposition-in-exile to 
the military dictators of the country, is an emblematic 
post-Cold War figure himself. Cardoso's Brazil is palpably 
more confident, less defensive, more outward-looking -- and 
more willing to work with the U.S. The Brazilians see a chance 
to bury forever the old saw, "Brazil is the country of tomorrow 
-- and always will be." 
Your personal relationship with Cardoso, Mr. President, has 
already been critical. .You got him to Miami. More important, 
by his own account, his visit to Washington and discussion with 
you broadened his perspective and reinforced his resolve. It 
was not until after that visit that his Administration got its 
act together and started to make substantial legislative 
progress. 
We need to develop a strategy on how to deal with Brazil on 
an array of economic and political issues. To some extent, 
Brazil still sees itself as our rival for economic influence 
within the hemisphere and challenges us frequently. We need to 
coax the Brazilians toward a win/win view of NAFTA and MERCOSUR 
-- and of the relationship between the two. We need to draw 
them into the NPT (we initiated a dialogue on that subject 
during our stop in Brasilia). 
...S.FreRET/NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 6]
C O 6 6 9 818 7 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019 
---SelettETiNODIS 
• - 6 - 
The Brazilians want our support for a permanent seat on the 
UN Security Council.  We're not in a position to accommodate 
them now, and we may never be -- it will depend on our larger 
strategy for UN reform. But we should engage with them on that 
issue in a way that persuades them we're prepared,to take them 
seriously -- and work together with them -- on the world stage. 
One South American country we did not visit was much on 
everyone's mind: Venezuela. Virtually everyone we talked to is 
deeply worried that Venezuela simply doesn't have the 
determined, forward-looking leadership necessary to pull out of 
the morass in which it finds itself. We need to intensify our 
own engagement with that government,"both bilaterally and in 
concert with the other Latins, to nudge the Venezuelans in the 
right direction. The.Caracas government's decison to permit a 
system of joint ventures with the private sector in the energy 
sector is an important and positive step. 
At same time, we should be thinking quietly about 
contingency plans for Venezuela's going seriously off the 
rails. An economy that deteriorates further or continues to 
stagnate could touch off massive social and political unrest, 
which could in turn trigger another military coup, this time 
successful. The Organization American States haS a standing 
commitment to support democracy and respond in unison if a 
country abandons democracy. This commitment was fulfilled in 
Haiti in 1991-94 and Guatemala in 1993; but Venezuela is a much 
larger country, and a coup there would be much harder to 
reverse, even with a unified effort by all of us in the 
hemisphere. Preventative work, including with the 
international financial institutions is essential. 
'We come away from this visit convinced that the major 
countries of the hemisphere are serious global players inclined 
to line up on our side on most every issue and whose agendas, 
largely consonant with the Summit of the Americas, represent a 
big plus for our foreign policy. The challenge now is to build 
on our achievements creatively and aggressively. As Mark Twain 
put it, even when you're on the right track, if you stand 
still, sooner or later you're going to get run over. 
cc: The Vice President 
Mr. Leon Panetta 
Mr. Anthony Lake 
SEC NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698187 Date: 07/25/2019