[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 8 7 2 2 5 F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687225 Date: 02/09/2021 
Attachment 1 
Talking Points RELEASE IN FULL 
1. The Oil and Gas Framework Agreement is designed to provide 
Eximbarik with the security it will need to provide $2 billion or 
more of financing in support of U.S. exports for the revitalization 
of the Russian energy sector. 
2. The Framework Agreement will play a critical role in 
reinvigorating the Russian economy by facilitating the supply of 
equipment, services and technology needed by Russian oil and gas 
production facilities that are closed or producing below capacity. 
The returns to Russia will be swift since the U.S. goods and 
services financed with Eximbank support in the,oil and gas sectors 
will substantially increase Russian exports and foreign exchange 
revenues. 
3. Instead of a sovereign guarantee, Eximbank will be secured 
from hard currency sales of existing Russian oil and gas to foreign 
purchasers that will be well in excess of the amounts of financing 
that Eximbank is providing. The contracts for such sales will be 
assigned as security for the financing, with the 'actual proceeds 
deposited by the purchasers in offshore accounts (outside of 
Russia) and used directly to repay all financing. Eximbank will 
also be taking security interests in the items it finances. 
4.. The Russian government and the Russian Central Bank will 
agree in the Framework Agreement to take all actions, including the 
granting of quotas, licenses and approvals, needed to put these 
security arrangements in place and maintainthem, as well as to 
refrain from taking actions which could _ interfere with- their __—operation. 
5. Each transaction under the Framework Agreement will be 
approved on a case-by-case basis, and in order to find the 
reasonable assurance of repayment that is mandated by law, Eximbank 
will be monitoring on a regular basis general economic conditions 
in Russia. 
6. The Russian government has indicated that as much as $5 
billion in U.S. equipment and services may be needed to revitalize 
existing oil and gas fields. Until now, Russia has relied mainly 
on Western Europe for energy-sector imports. The Framework 
Agreement will enable U.S. exports to the Russian energy sector to 
increase significantly. 41. 
7. Eximbank has issued a preliminary commitment to the 
Russian Ministry of Fuel and Energy offering $500 million in 
financing to cover the tirst transactions to be approved, once the 
Framework Agreement is in place and Russia has been approved for a 
waiver of the World Bank's negative pledge clause. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687225 Date: 02/09/2021