[Page 1]
C O 6 6 9 812 9=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
Friday, September 15, 1995 
Chris: 
RELEASE IN 
FULL 
This is a long report on a short trip. Attached to this memo is a full 
memcon on the Kozyrev meeting. I'm giving it to you raw, bad jokes and all. 
Until you've had a chance to cast your eye (and pen) over it, it won't go to 
anyone else. Over the weekend I'll work it into a form that is appropriate for 
the system. But I wanted you to have the full flavor. Before getting to the 
memcon, however, I wanted to set down here some overall impressions and 
recommendations. 
My one-word summary of the trip would be: whew! There's no 
question that the Belgrade framework document and the ensuing pause in the 
bombing helped immensely with the Russians. The Kozyrev who received me 
was very much the good one -- relaxed, joking, notipolemical, altogether in a 
problem-solving mode. I'd previewed my basic message with Mamedov, so 
Andrei knew what he was going to hear from me. I have little doubt, 
however, that if the bombs (not to mention the dreaded "Tomahawks" = to 
which he referred three times) had been falling, he would have been chewing 
on his nails and on various parts of my anatomy. 
At the same time, my sense is that Kozyrev was still quite worried 
about his side -- and maybe his boss -- having almost spun out of control. 
Kozyrev all but said as much; he was clearly embarrassed by Yeltsin's press 
conference (and was pleased that I noted how much more constructive and 
moderate his own September 11 public statements had been); he disavowed the 
Russian government's accusation that NATO was committing "genocide" (he 
said this had come from the Prime Minister's office, not the Foreign Ministry 
-- "therefore [wry smile] it should be taken up in the Gore-Chernomyrdin 
Commission"). But I got the feeling that whatever Kozyrev's misgivings 
about the howls and threats emitting from Moscow over the past week or so, 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 812 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019, 
he would have been neither willing nor able to do much about them were it 
not for the latest progress on the diplomatic front and the bombing pause. 
The idea of my toddling off to Sochi to see Yeltsin never came up. 
My guess is that 'Yeltsin's attitude was just too uncertain, especially since it 
wasn't clear that there would be a pause until about the time I landed in 
Moscow. As it was, Kozyrev released a statement after my meeting with him 
that put an upbeat spin on the session. (The text is attached, right after the 
memcon.) He then went to Sochi to report to Yeltsin himself this morning; 
Mamedov says it was a favorable report. I got the sense my trip gave 
Kozyrev a welcome excuse for flying down to Sochi for a private tete-d-tete 
with his boss about Bosnia. With the bombing pause in place, he Old me he 
would try to get Yeltsin to "turn the page" on last week's overheated rhetoric 
and focussed on a constructive future role for Russia in implementing the 
peace. 
So we may have 'averted a severe breach with Moscow in the last few 
days. My mission was more of a beneficiary of that development than a 
catalyst, although I think it was worth my being there to reinforce and clarify 
some points -- and to demonstrate what the Russians can't hear often enough, 
which is: message -- we care; we take them seriously as critical players on 
European security issues; etc. 
But like the bombing pause itself, the respite in U.S.-Russian tensions 
over Bosnia may be brief. We're likely to be up against the.same problem in 
a matter of days. I'll be interested to hear yours, but my guess is that the 
odds are against Mladié saying uncle this time around; I find it difficult to 
imagine he won't try to slip the noose on the heavy weapons, just as he did 
over Labor Day. We'll see. But we've obviously got to be ready for more 
Serb mischief and defiance, and that means we've got to be ready to resume 
bombing. And that means we've got to be ready to manage the Russians 
2 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 3]
C O6 6 9 8 12 9:1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
during the week ahead. 
Most immediately, they must understand that the bombing will indeed 
resume unless the Serbs comply -- and that the Belgrade document 
acknowledges that fact. I did my best with Kozyrev, and in several follow-up 
conversations with Mamedov, to hammer that point home. You might want to 
fire off a letter of your own to Andrei (I'm attaching a draft). They also need 
to be reassured that we're serious about not giving the Bosnians an entirely 
free ride -- i.e., that we'll pull out all the stops with Sarajevo to get those guys 
to restrain themselves militarily and cooperate with the UN on HW • 
monitoring. That issue, too, I've dealt with in the draft letter. 
There are three other things they want, or three manifestations of the 
same thing, which is steady (and heavier) doses of respect to cure their 
Rodney Dangerfield syndrome: 1) more "consultation" on process and more 
co-credit for results; 2) a big meeting of some kind in Moscow, bigger than 
the CG session, one that Yeltsin himself can host; and 3) inclusion in the 
implementation force in a form that does not put their soldiers under direct 
NATO command (or at least that's the way I decode what I heard). 
I know all this makes you sigh heavily and perhaps, if you're really 
annoyed, roll your eyes. I can just hear you thinking to yourself: There .they 
go again. And there goes my trusty deputy, making the case not just for 
tolerance but for accommodation of the big babies in Moscow. 
I admit it: they're a real head case. But their capacity for doing harm 
here is immense, and keeping them sullen but not mutinous over Bosnia is part 
of the larger task of keeping Russian reform and U.S.-Russian relations more 
or less on track. So once again, I think we've just got to go about the conduct 
of diplomacy, as adolescent (if not abnormal) psychiatry where Moscow is 
concerned. 
3 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 4]
C O6 6 9 8 12 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
Here's how I'd propose we accommodate -- partially -- them in the 
three areas where they are crying out for it: 
1) Consultations: In the draft letter to Kozyrev, I've suggested some 
language that will both meet them halfway and also put the monkey back on 
their back; 
2) On the "big meeting," is there any chance that we could see our way 
clear to supporting a high- (though not necessarily highest-) level meeting in 
Moscow on economic development and reconstruction for the former 
Yugoslavia? With CG backing, Yeltsin might, at the appropriate time, invite 
the three ex-Yugo heads of state? We might be represented by (gulp!) the 
Vice President. You'll get me in terrible trouble with Leon Fuerth if you tell 
him I'm proposing this. Going back to the birth of the GCC, he's been 
sensitive about my volunteering his boss's services. But if you see any merit 
in this, my next move would be in Leon's direction. I think this could fit the 
Russians' needs without causing any undue harm. And I think if you were, 
after the necessary vetting of the idea, privately to commit to Kozyrev to 
support the plan, it would help rope them in. 
3) The Russians in, or somehow associated with, IFOR: this is really 
tough. We are, of course, rock-solid in insisting on this being a NATO force; 
no Americans in blue helmets; U.S. generals in charge of non-Americans, not 
the other way around. But we've got to think our way out of a box that we're 
now in: everything that makes IFOR acceptable to us makes it unacceptable to 
Moscow. Somehow we've got to square IFOR's essential, operational identity 
as a U.S.-led NATO operation with the Russian neuralgia about the Alliance 
and the virtual impossibility of Russian forces operating under a NATO flag. 
Totally stiffing the Russians is simply not an option. We've got to do 
what we can to bring them in linewith the concept from the start, since we'll 
almost certainly need a UNSC mandate for the operation. Um not sure that 
4 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 5]
C O 6 6 9 812 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
they literally have a veto over our plan, but they can sure make life miserable 
for us, both on this issue and more generally. 
This is virgin territory for the theoreticians and the planners of NATO, 
so it will take time to work it out among ourselves, not to mention with 
Moscow. 
During the trip, I spent some time on this subject with Steve Pifer (who 
was one of my deputies in S/NIS and is now at the NSC -- and he was 
invaluable in the support he gave me on this trip). Brainstorming the IFOR 
issue, Steve and I reviewed the options in the paper that Jim Steinberg and S/P 
have prepared that I mentioned on the phone the other day. The first two --
putting the Russians under NATO as part of a Combined Joint Task Force or 
creating a Desert Storm-type "coalition of the willing" run by the U.S. -- will 
probably not fly with Moscow. 
More likely is a cosmetic arrangement whereby there's a UNSC 
overlay of some kind, a blessing for what would be in fact (though perhaps not 
in name) a NATO operation with the Russians being "subcontracted" to deal 
with a specific task, such as verifying arms-control/restraint measures or 
supervising aid distribution; there would be-a coordinating mechanism between 
the Russians and the NATO commanders, who would run the peace- \ 
keeping/enforcement operation. 
This would not be easy for our own government, but it may be 
necessary if the Russians want to do real work and be, at least in theory, on a 
par with us. 
(There's another idea floating around, including in the S/P paper, that 
strikes me as too problematic: that would be to subcontract a region -- to be 
sure a carefully chosen one -- to the Russians. We'd have to be exceedingly 
careful about this idea. The last thing we want is to create "zones," along the 
5 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 6]
C O6 6 9 8 12 9:1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
lines of post-WW2 Germany, with U.S. and Russian troops squared off against 
each other abross Serb/Bosnian lines.) 
I keep circling back to the thought that our colleagues ought to try to 
come up with some sort of PFP tie-in, although that's not terribly promising, 
given, the infancy of the program. 
In any event, I see no reason not to lay out for Mamedov the box we're 
in and invite him to do some flexible thinking on the forms that would allow 
the Russians to participate without compromising our position. The Russians 
are in a similar box. We do have some leverage over .them in this, given the 
Russian eagerness not to be frozen out. 
The good news is that if we can work something out on this issue, it 
will help us not just with Bosnia now (by helping keep the .Russians on the 
reservation during a rough period ahead) but also With NATO expansion and 
the NATO-Russia dialogue later on. 
Finally, as you'll see from the memcon, Kozyrev made quite a point 
about the need to prepare extensively for the Hyde Park meeting between the 
Presidents. He is still quaking from the experience we had in Moscow in 
May, when our President didn't quite get Yeltsin to say the magic words on 
doing the deed in Noordwijk; that required us to jump through hoops during 
dinner in the Hall of Facets. Basically, Kozyrev thinks we need to script the 
presidential conversation more thoroughly, especially on the perennial NATO 
subject (which will have become all the trickier because of what we will have 
been through over Bosnia). He'll want to work through the broad outlines in 
your session with him at the UN. 
That brings us to the issue of Tony's wanderlust. As you'll see, I told 
Kozyrev I thought you'd be willing to have a follow-on meeting of some kind 
after New York, but I didn't commit to who it would be. I gotta tell you, 
6 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 7]
C O6 6 9 8 12 91ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
Chris, that I sense we're going to have a real tussle over this one. Which we 
need like a hole in the head. 
Now, if you can stand it, here's the full memcon... 
7 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 8]
C06698 2 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
-0-
I saw Kozyrev in his office at the Ministry from 2:30 to 5:15. This is 
the third such session I've had with him. In both of the previous ones, he 
opened with long monologues and was quite peremptory. This time he was 
relaxed, almost jovial. I opened up by asking whether he'd had a good 
vacation. He launched into a leisurely description of how he'd spent his time 
in Sochi perfecting his windsurfing. He boasted he is now so good he can stay 
up while waving to the girls on the beach. He now enjoys windsurfingis,even 
more than tennis. ("Theie's no other man involved, no machine -- just you 
against the forces of nature.") He wondered aloud if he should invite you to 
go windsurfing with him when you meet in New York. He invited me to 
Sochi the next summer so that I, too, can get good, enough at windsurfing to 
wave to the girls on the beach. (I assume the same offer applies to Tony.) 
I then noted that he was the host and the ranking official, inviting him 
to get down to business while noting that I had a couple of thoughts of my 
own to express on your behalf. He said he'd be glad for me to start. He 
added only that he and Yeltsin very much appreciated President Clinton's 
September 13 letter and your sending me to Moscow. Yeltsin-had asked 
Kozyrev to receive amplification of President Clinton's and your thinking from 
me and report directly to him. He then went into listening mode. 
I very briefly delivered the main points from the script we worked out 
before I left. I said that you and the President had sent me to Moscow 
because we are all quite worried about the strains Bosnia is putting both on our 
bilateral relationship and on the ties we are trying to nurture between Russia 
and the West, and between Russia and NATO. President Clinton wanted 
President Yeltsin to know that he is determined to ensure not only that Bosnia 
does not undermine U.S.-Russia relations, but that we use our joint efforts to 
8 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 9]
C 06 6 9 8 12 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
bring peace to the Balkans to strengthen Russia's ties to the U.S., the West 
and NATO. President Clinton's goal is the same as President Yeltsin's: to end 
the Balkan war. For that to happen, the U.S. and Russia must work together. 
It doesn't matter who gets the credit. If we are successful, there will be 
enough credit to go around. 
Part of the problem, I said, is that we haven't yet perfected our 
mechanisms of communicating on Bosnia. The other reason the President and 
you had sent him to Moscow was to ensure Russia had real-time information 
on our latest diplomatic efforts. I told him I had spoken to you and to 
Holbrooke by phone immediately before coming to see him; Holbrooke had 
just completed talks in Belgrade aimed at achieving BSA compliance with the 
UN's conditions to restore the safety of Sarajevo so that NATO bombing could 
cease. After eight hours of talks between Holbrooke and Milosevid (five with 
Karadfié and Mladié in the room), the Bosnian Serbs had signed the Belgrade 
document. I briefed Kozyrev on the details, making sure he understood all the 
trigger points and deadlines and emphasizing that the bombing would resume if 
the BSA did not show substantial compliance within 72 hours and full 
compliance within 144 hours. I also made very clear that there was nothing in 
the Belgrade document that could be construed as conditioning Serb 
compliance on Bosniac behavior and therefore nothing that could serve as a 
pretext for Serb foot-dragging. However, I also told him that Holbrooke was 
en route to Mostar to see Izetbegovié, and I stressed that the U.S. would use 
its influence with the Bosniacs to get their agreement to begin discussing a 
cessation of hostilities first around Sarajevo, then nationwide if the agreement 
was being implemented by the Bosnian, Serbs, as stipulated in. paragraph 7 of 
the Belgrade statement. But, I repeated, Kozyrev should understand that the 
document represented a unilateral BSA commitment. 
At this point, Kozyrev was called out for a phone call "from Sochi" --, 
likely from one of Yeltsin's assistants. He returned after 20 minutes and said 
9 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 10]
C 0 6 6 9 8 12 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
he had made a preliminary report on the Belgrade document. He was, at this 
point, still pretty cautious but leaning toward favorable in the tone of his 
reaction. 
I concluded my opening presentation by asking Kozyrev for two things: 
1) Russia's vocal, public endorsement ("your seal of approval") for the 
Belgrade document, and 2) the strongest possible Russian pressure on Belgrade 
and Pale to implement the document fully and promptly; Mladié must 
understand, I said, that anything less than full compliance will trigger the 
bombing. 
Kozyrev responded by welcoming President Clinton's strong desire to 
keep the U.S.-Russian relationship stable. He said, this was also Yeltsin's 
desire. Yeltsin shares our desire that the Bosnia controversy not "grow out of 
proportion." His September 8 press conference had been only a "warning" to 
the West about what might happen -- it did not represent his preferred course 
or his description of the state of affairs now. But, Kozyrev continued, there 
are strong forces in the Duma and elsewhere (the clear implication was that 
meant inside the executive branch, presumably the hard liners around Yeltsin) 
that will use any pretext to interpret Yeltsin's statements more widely. We 
shouldn't underestimate the widespread feeling in Russia that it had not been 
consulted enough, that its interests had not been considered and that it was not 
an equal partner in the peace process. 
Kozyrev then pickFd up on what I'd said about needing to develop the 
habits and mechanisms of cooperation, noting he'd discussed this with you in 
Vladivostok last year. This isn't just an abstract problem, he said, it's 
concrete. There is a "procedural-organizational" trap in the way things work 
now. On the one hand, there is a "strategic understanding" between our 
presidents that the U.S. and Russia are partners. But by definition, the 
10 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 11]
C 0 6 6 9 8 12 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
established frameworks for cooperation -- prirn arily the EU and NATO --
exclude Russia because it isn't a member. So, Kozyrev stressed, the 
mechanisms themselves create problems. When you consult with "your 
allies," Russia is excluded. You should speak instead of consulting with your 
"allies and Russia." Put Boris Yeltsin "in your Yellow Pages... on your auto 
dial," he urged. When you're making phone calls to Paris, London and Bonn, 
put Moscow on the list "in alphabetical order." (Warning: the French won't 
like this arrangement.) 
We all want this "bloody goddamn war" to end, Kozyrev said. But it's 
equally important that this be a "visibly cooperative achievement." There is a 
feeling of resentment not just in Moscow but more widely in Europe against 
the U.S. for hogging the limelight, especially in the last month or so. He 
cited conversations with Rivkind and Agnelli, alleging that they complained to 
him about the U.S. portraying the new, intensified diplomacy as a purely U.S. 
endeavor. Many people feel "sidelined." The Europeans, he said, can do a 
lot to help in Bosnia, but they and the Russians can also make problems. 
And, of course, the parties to the conflict all have "masters degrees" in 
playing the U.S. and Russia off against each other. So presentation is very 
important. This is especially true, Kozyrev concluded, because "I really 
believe we have a chance now -- there is a light at the, end of the tunnel." He 
had talked to his deputy Ivanov just before I came in, and Ivanov sees it the 
same way. 
Then he went to his only real complaint with the Belgrade document: 
the reference to "the American peace initiative" in the first sentence. 
Everything should be presented in a more balanced way, he said. It could be 
called a U.S.-Russian initiative, a Contact Group initiative -- anything would 
be better to Russian ears. In his own public statements, Kozyrev said he would 
stress the role of the Contact Group. 
11 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 12]
C O6 6 9 8 12 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
I reminded him that the Belgrade document was a unilateral Serb 
statement; besides, the last thing we should be doing was reopening the 
language. He agreed, saying he was just trying to underscore his larger point. 
He then declared himself "very supportive," saying the document 
looked "very positive" -- particularly because it called for a suspension of the 
air strikes. I stressed that it also makes clear that the air strikes will resume if 
Mladié doesn't comply fully with what is now his own written, signed 
commitment. Kozyrev said he understood. 
He then question„what he understood to be the stipulation that NATO 
alone would make the determination about compliance. I corrected this 
misimpression, pointing out the passage in the text which gives Generals 
Janvier and Smith a key voice on behalf of the UN. Kozyrev seemed 
mollified. He then asked again about the Bosnian government's obligation to 
withdraw its heavy weaponš. I noted that the verbs in paragraph 3 of the 
document had been carefully chosen to avoid the impression that the document 
was an agreement between Belgrade/Pale and Sarajevo or that the Serbs' 
behavior was conditioned on the Bosniacs'; nonetheless, I continued, the 
Bosniacs had previously promised to allow UN oversight of their weapons if 
the BSA withdrew its artillery, and the USG would work to hold Sarajevo to 
that commitment. 
Kozyrev asked what we, the U.S., could say about guarantees of safety 
for the Bosnian Serb population of Sarajevo if the BSA withdraws its heavy 
weapons. I noted that we are aware of the problem and are working hard on 
it. Izetbegovid had already made certain assurances and we will hold him to 
them. I noted that you either had called Izetbegovié or would be doing so 
shortly. He took satisfaction from that. 
But I emphasized again that we have to be sure not to give the BSA any 
12 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 13]
C 0 6 6 9 812 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
excuse not to withdraw or to delay in doing so. 
U.S. and Russian goals are compatible, I continued. We have four 
main points to work on together: ensuring that the pause induces full 
compliance by the Serbs; reaching agreement on a formula for extending the 
suspension of sanctions on Serbia (the UN had agreed on another 113 days, I 
said, although we were prepared to go to 180); formulating security assurances 
around Sarajevo during the BSA withdrawal; and a crafting a meaningful role 
for Russia in the post-settlement implementation force. I then added a fifth 
objective: "keeping Bosnia from becoming the crisis that devours the U.S.-
Russian relationship." 
In that connection, I said, President Clinton is very concerned about the 
linkages Russia has been making between the NATO bombing of Sarajevo and 
Moscow's willingness to cooperate with NATO more generally. This negative 
dynamic can and must be reversed. By the time the Presidents meet in Hyde 
Park in October, we should find a way to make our cooperation on Bosnia a 
positive factor for Russia-NATO cooperation. If we had made more progress 
on the NATO-Russia relationship earlier in the year, we might not have quite 
such a severe problem now over Bosnia. Had we not lost six months between 
Brussels/Budapest last December and Moscow/Halifax this spring, the 
mechanisms of consultation and cooperation that he's so eager to see would 
already exist. In that regard, I urged Russia to assign a senior military officer 
to work with Churkin in Brussels and to station a senior military expert at 
NATO headquarters. 
I then made the case for the last several weeks as a classic illustration 
of the principle you've called "diplomacy backed by force." The Serbs signed 
the Belgrade document in no small measure because of the NATO air strikes 
and the changed military situation on the ground in Bosnia. As difficult as it 
is for Russia to swallow the spectacle of NATO bombing Serbs, the alternative 
13 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 14]
C O 6 6 9 812 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
would be worse: the Bosnia crisis was fast becoming a cancer that could have 
eaten away at the body of Europe if it was not stopped. That would have huge 
implications for U.S.-Russian relations and for Russian-NATO relations; 
Russia would increasingly have painted itself into the corner as the lone 
defender of the Serbs; and the festering of the conflict would create a giant 
target of opportunity for 'radical Is1am in Europe. I reminded Kozyrev of how 
obsessed Grachev had been with that danger when Barry McCaffrey and I 
went to see him in May 1993. 
I said we had all read Yeltsin's press conference statement (September 
8) very carefully. I added that I had also read Kozyrev's subsequent 
comments(September 11), which were notably more moderate and calm. 
"Don't overemphasize the gap," Kozyrev warned with a smile -- i.e., Don't 
pay me any compliments on that score in public. I said he needn't worry 
_about that. Still, I continued, we found it curious that "some in Moscow" 
have taken a harder line against the bombing than Belgrade. I allowed as how 
Dick Holbrooke had spent more time with Milosevié than with his new wife 
lately so we have a pretty good idea how Milosevié feels about the bombing, 
and we wonder why Moscow doesn't at least tune its own outrage to Belgrade 
rather than Pale. 
(My crack about Holbrooke's marital initiative aroused a lot of 
curiosity from Kozyrev. His own marriage has recently broken up, and you 
know from the beginning of this interminable memcon his principal reason for 
taking up water sports in Sochi. He asked us to send him a copy of the 
People magazine profile of Dick and Kati and seemed disappointment that I 
was not aware that a Russian publication recently ran a picture of a young 
woman he's apparently now connected with. He called the item "very 
compromising," and seemed quite delighted with it.) 
Back to high diplomacy. 
14 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 15]
C O6 6 9 8 12 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
He took my point about how Moscow's reaction had exceeded 
Belgrade's and agreed that "we shouldn't be more Catholic than the Pope." 
Or more Orthodox than the Patriarch, I suggested helpfully. I gigged him for 
his Ministry spokesman using the term "genocide." That was the Prime 
Minister's spokesman, he insisted, "so perhaps you should put this matter of 
defining genocide onto the agenda of the Gore-ChernomYrdin Commission." 
I told him that I would probably be seeing someone from the 
Parliament but didn't want that to come as a surprise. Knowing how sensitive 
this one is, I used a mock-code: I might be seeing "Mr. Onion" or "Mr. Fish" 
(a play on the Russian derivation of Lukin's and Rybkin's names respectively). 
He quickly got into the spirit of that, suggesting any of a number of other 
parliamentarians whose names lent themselves to bilingual puns. He referred 
to Shumeiko as "The Noise Man" and Bykov as "Mr. Bull." 
As I write this, I realize it may sound a tad frivolous (Tom would call 
it goofy) -- the verbal equivalent of a windsurfing match. But the joking 
around really did serve to loosen the exchange up in a useful way. It was as 
candid as he's ever been with me. 
Fine for me to see Parliamentarians, he said: "just don't use them to 
pass any message -- especially to Yeltsin. Be careful not to set up any other 
negotiating channels. Just use the meetings to explain your point of view." 
(As it turned out, I saw Lukin for breakfast the next morning; Rybkin was out 
of town.) 
That seemed like the right context in which to mention that Bill Perry 
was considering a suggestion from Grachev to meet in the Balkans and was 
considering a counter-proposal of Garmisch. After thinking it over for a 
minute (one .of his very rare pauses for thought -- he enjoys the quick 
comeback, as you know), Kozyrev said he thought the two defense ministers 
should indeed meet, particularly if the talks focussed on Russia's role in the 
15 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 16]
C O 6 6 9 812 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
implementation *force. "We have to avoid a situation where only NATO is in 
charge," he said. They can discuss military matters like command and 
control. There must.be some kind of UN or international superstructure which 
provides an important role for Russia. "Otherwise we'll be destroyed by our 
critics here... The arrangements for Russia's role in the implementation force 
will be a precedent for the future security arrangements of Europe so we must 
ensure we have an equal seat at the table. If we don't succeed in this, it will 
be ruinous to our future relations and our ability to cooperate with Europe... 
This issue is our weakest point with the Onion Man [Lukin], who always says, 
'You are not consulted. -- they are not listening to you, even though you have 
troops in UNPROFOR'." 
I put down a marker that this was going to be an extremely difficult 
issue. The U.S. and NATO had our own rules and processes. We'd have to 
work very hard and very soon to get it right. I suggested that Mamedov come 
next week prepared for some quiet conversations on this subject and perhaps 
bring some experts with him. Kozyrev agreed; 
He then went on to another area where "you could improve the feeling 
here," and that would be to give Russia a role in the "final agreements 
ceremonies... Presentation is key. I'll tell Yeltsin that, with the airstrikes in 
the past, we can turn a page now and focus on the future and Russia's 
contribution to a settlement. But we need some kind of tribute [sic] meeting 
here in Moscow." 
His reference to the bombing being in the past required me to interrupt 
and say that bombing might very well be in the immediate future unless the 
Serbs did the necessary. 
He looked pained but did not argue. Instead, he went on promoting a 
co-starring role for Moscow in the diplomatic extravaganzas to come. 
16 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 17]
C 0 6 6 9 812 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
I told him that we were nowhere near having to decide on venue for an 
international conference. There were arguments in favor of a variety of place 
-- the U.S., Geneva, Stockholm. I reminded of what I'd said when he had 
raised this same issue with me a couple of weeks ago on the phone, when I 
was Acting: that we'd be glad to see the ceremony held on the dark side of the 
moon if that's where the parties wanted' to go to sign a true peace. And the 
parties were clearly going to have a major say in this. 
He shrugged that off and plunged ahead: These things never end with 
just one peace conference, he said. There will surely have to be one meeting 
on constitutional arrangements and another .one "like Casablanca" to pledge 
money for reconstruction. "It's critical that one of them happen in Moscow... 
That will totally revive our relations with the West and will play very well in 
the election campaign. Otherwise there is a danger the Communists and the 
Zhironovsky forces will overplay the Bosnia thing and the anti-Americanism. 
They are all playing their own games, of course, but this anti-Westernism is a 
great card to play against yeltsin, against the government and me personally." 
It was at this point that he came back to something I'd said early on 
about the NATO bombing having unquestionably helped move the Serbs to the 
table. Recalling that I'd made that claim, Kozyrev said -- "for the record," 
and with a nod to his note taker (Nikolai Spassky, the head of the North 
America desk) -- "I can't agree that the airstrikes contributed to the 
diplomacy, although I'll grant that that impression is widely held in the world. 
Clinton and the U.S. are bigger than ever. That's why we need to restore the 
balance" -- i.e., give Russia more of a visible role. "If you want Yeltsin to 
order Grachev to send someone to Brussels to participate in PFP, he needs to 
show our public that we have a partnership, that Russia is not sidelined, that 
we are a key player. With a conference in Moscow we can achieve alot of 
things." 
17 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 18]
C 0 6 6 9 8 12 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
The mention of Grachev and PFP led me to remark that President 
Clinton considered Brussels and Budapest in December 1994 to be the low-
point in U.S.-Russian relations during his presidency. But we'd turned the 
situation around with Moscow, Noordwijk and Halifax in May and June. 
"That's because the Presidents trust each other. Boris Yeltsin knows Bill 
Clinton is not out to screw him or Russia. His goal is a strong, democratic, 
market-oriented Russia anchored in Europe and integrated in the world 
community. We now have to create a comparable positive dynamic on Bosnia. 
You may disagree that the airstrikes helped, but you know in your heart of 
hearts our goal is to achieve peace in the Balkans, not to make war against the 
Serbs or to embarrass Russia. The President doesn't want Bosnia to be a dark 
cloud at Hyde Park." 
On Hyde Park, Kozyrev stressed the importance of "straight talk" 
between the Presidents when they meet. He cited "the dinner incident" during 
the Moscow Summit in May when the Presidents had to use the meal to 
negotiate a date-certain for Russian accession to PFP because they had failed 
to be precise during their one-on-one. I agreed; if the Presidents had not 
nailed down the date-certain over dinner, "there might not have been a 
Noordwijk or a Halifax, or at least not the ones we'd wanted." 
"Or a Kozyrev or a Talbott," he added; "we would have been out of 
our jobs. We would have had to start a Kissinger Associates-style consulting 
firm -- Kozyrev-Talbott Associates." 
Turning serious again, he said we had to do the best possible job 
preparing for the next presidential meeting. When things are left vague --
"when our bosses say, 'the Ministers will work it out" -- there can be 
trouble." Kozyrey made pretty clear what he means by that: without an 
explicit Yeltsin imprimatur on, say, Russia's accession to PFP by a date-
certain, he has huge bureaucratic problems after the summit getting the right 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 19]
C O 6 6 9 812 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
outcome back in Moscow. Rather than trying to cover the whole agenda at 
Hyde Park, he suggested, the Presidents should concentrate on two or three 
precise agreements and get them done. For example, Kozyrev said, Clinton 
should reiterate that NATO will "go on with it's study"; that there will be no 
real expansion for the time being. 
I interjected that the President would surely want to use Hyde Park to 
reiterate the points he made to Yeltsin on NATO when they saw each other in 
Moscow and Halifax. 
However that issue is handled, Kozyrev said, we must "precook" as 
much of the conversation as possible. I agreed, noting that Mamedov and I 
would meet next week to begin planning for Hyde Park and you and Kozyrev 
would meet the following week in New York. Perhaps a U.S. "working visit" 
to Moscow in mid-October would also be helpful. Definitely, he said. 
Toward the end of our session, an aide brought Kozyrev a handwritten 
note saying a Middle Eastern Group had claimed responsibility for the RPG 
attack on the U.S. embassy on September 13 and that it was linked to 
Lebanon. The group claimed the Israeli Embassy in Moscow would be hit 
next. (It occurred to me that this dramatic interruption might have been staged 
to point the finger away from Russian terrorists.) 
After a brief, inconclusive discussion about the reliability of this report, 
I returned to the subject of Bosnia and asked Kozyrev to send a message to 
Milosevié supporting the Belgrade document and urging full, swift compliance. 
Kozyrev said he'd send a message that night. (On September 15, Mamedov 
confirmed Kozyrev had done so; I asked him to ensure this message was 
double-tracked to Mladié and Karadzié.) 
19 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 20]
C 0 66 9 8 12 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
-0-
Shortly after I saw him, Kozyrev released the following statement: 
On September 14, 1995, Russian Foreign Minister A. V. 
Kozyrev received U.S. Deputy Secretary of State S. Talbott, who came 
to Moscow.on instructions from U.S. President B. Clinton and 
Secretary of State W. Christopher. 
During their almost three hour discussion, they openly put forth 
their respective views on the situation in Bosnia. The Russian side 
underscored the necessity of an immediate cessation of NATO airstrikes 
and an early_cease-fire in the Sarajevo regioh and throughout Bosnia. 
A. V. Kozyrev informed Russian President B. N. Yeltsin of the 
views of the U.S. President as conveyed by S. Talbott. Taking into 
account the positions of both Presidents, the sides underscored the 
necessity of accelerating efforts, along with other partners in the 
Contact Group, to achieve an agreement that would allow an easing of 
the situation, and give an impulse to the search for a general political 
settlement. The sides also undertook to use all their influence with the 
parties to the conflict toward this goal. 
(Kozyrev played a small game with the statement, trying to get me to 
join him in a call for a cessation of hostilities without reference either to the 
HW withdrawals and the "or-else" of resumed bombing. But at least he 
played it straight, giving me a chance to sign off on the text before he released 
it.) 
-0-
20 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 21]
C 0 6 6 9 812 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
Now, here's the draft letter I propose for you to send to Kozyrev 
tomorrow if at all possible. In addition to your own ministrations, it also 
requires some input and fine-tuning by Jim Collins and John Kornblum, and 
I'd hope Peter might take a look at it as well. Steve Pifer has been over it and 
can shepherd it through the NSC quickly. - 
Saturday, September 16, 1995 
Dear Andrei: 
Strobe has just returned and reported to me on his visit to Moscow. I 
arn most grateful to you for receiving him at such length on Thursday 
afternoon. In addition to appreciating your hospitality, Strobe was pleased 
with the substance of your talks, and so am I. President Clinton has been . 
following our exchanges closely, and he has asked me to convey his personal 
thanks to you for your part in working through a difficult patch in the 
relationship. 
• As you know, our work on the issue of Bosnia is far from done. We 
have sorne tough moments ahead, I have no doubt, including perhaps in the 
very near future, so I wanted to follOw up promptly on your discussion with 
Strobe. 
The framework document signed by the Bosnian Serbs. and witnessed 
by President Milosevié two days ago was an important and potentially positive 
development. It reflects,**** among other things, the repeated representations 
you and your government have made to Belgrade on behalf of the Contact 
Group-led peace process. I understand from Strobe that following your 
meeting, you sent a message to President Milosevié endorsing the Belgrade 
document and urging its prompt and complete implementation. That is very 
helpful. [CHRIS: I ASKED MAMEDOV ALSO TO SEND A MESSAGE TO 
21 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 22]
C O 6 6 9 812 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
PALE; IF WE GET CONFIRMATION THAT THEY'VE DONE SO, WE 
MIGHT INCLUDE MENTION OF THAT HERE.] 
The Belgrade framework document helped set the stage for the meeting 
of the Contact Group at your mission in Geneva yesterday. A SENTENCE OR 
TWO CHARACTERIZING THAT IN WHATEVER TERMS ARE 
APPROPRIATE. THEN A SENTENCE LOOKING AHEAD TO THE CG 
MEETING IN MOSCOW, WITH WHATEVER QUALIFICATIONS ARE 
REQUIRED, BUT OBVIOUSLY PLAYING IT UP. 
While these are all favorable developments on the diplomatic track, the 
willingness of the international community to use force if necessary remains a 
vital element in bring peace to the region. When he announced the current 
pause in the airstrikes late Thursday, Kofi Anan made clear that it is up to the 
Serbs to meet the conditions to end the bombing. • They have undertaken to 
remove the heavy weaponry from the exclusion around Sarajevo within the 
coming [five?] days. I know you share our hope that the Bosnian Serbs will 
live up to the terms to which they committed themselves in the framework 
document and that further airstrikes will not be necessary. If they fail to do 
so, however, they will have only themselves to blame for the resumption of 
the airstrikes. ' 
I emphasize this point for two reasons: first, in hopes that you will 
stress it in your own dealings with Pale and Belgrade; and.second, in hopes 
that a resumption of the bombing, if that is the course the Serbs choose for 
themselves, will not exacerbate relations between our countries. The last two 
weeks were worrisome in that respect. We must not let U.S.-Russian relations 
become hostage to the stratagems and recalcitrance of the leaders in Pale. The 
U.S. and Russia have a common task of historic and global dimensions; we 
cannot let others drive a wedge between us or divert us from our comrnon 
goals. 
22 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 23]
C O 6 6 9 812 9 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
4 
We are well aware of how complex this issue is for you. President 
Clinton has made American support for the Russian reform one of the 
hallmarks of his Administration, and he will continue to do so. But this must 
be a joint effort, and we will count on you and your colleagues to exert a 
steadying influence in what will no doubt continue to be a volatile, even 
dangerous situation. 
For our part, we will use our channels to Sarajevo, as we have already 
done, to press the Bosnian government to abide by President Izetbegovid's 
assurance not to take advantage of the Bosnian Serb withdrawal of heavy 
weapons. 
We will also make an effort, during the difficult and perhaps decisive 
period ahead, to keep the interests of Russia clearly in mind. In response to 
some of the specific points that you raised with Strobe, I'd like to assure you 
of the following: 
THEN AN INSERT WITH THE MOST FORTHCOMING 
FORMULATION OF OUR POSITION ON EXTENSION OF SUSPENSION 
OF THE SANCTIONS. 
On your exhortation that we find ways of being in ,closer touch over 
Bosnia, it seems to me that the fast-breaking pace of events requires multiple 
points of contact. In addition to using our embassies, I suggest we ensure that 
Ambassadors Albright and Lavrov have clear instructions to consult closely in 
New York. I will ask Ambassador Hunter to stay in regular touch with 
Ambassador Churkiff and facilitate any meetings he wishes to have at NATO. 
Ambassador Holbrooke's shuttle diplomacy is hectic and his schedule is ever-
changing, but he will look for ways to keep your government up to date on his 
mission. This can be through meetings with Deputy Foreign Minister Ivanov 
or Ambassador Zotov in the region, or through information transmitted 
through our embassy in Moscow. And, of course, I will be in frequent contact _ 
23 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 24]
C 0 6 6 9 812 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019 
with you. 
I would also suggest that there are some steps of your own you could 
take to facilitate communication and coordination: attaching a senior military 
official to Ambassador Churkin and a military expert to NATO headquarters. 
(WE MAY WANT TO INSERT A REF HERE TO THE PERRY-GRACHEV 
DISCUSSIONS IF THEY'VE OCCURRED.) 
We should also begin now to lay the ground for maximum cooperation 
between the U.S. and Russia in the implementation of a peace settlement. As 
with other aspects of the challenge we are grappling with in Bosnia, the 
structuring of an implementation force is a test of the ability of NATO and 
Russia to develop innovative ways to complement each other -- to develop 
patterns of trust and cooperation with practical benefits both for the present 
and the future. We must pass that test, for the sake of peace in the Balkans 
and also in order to advance the larger cause to which our two Presidents are 
committed: the evolution of an integrated post-Cold War security structure in 
Europe. 
Finally, Strobe told me about the importance you attach to holding a 
major international meeting in Moscow on the subject of Bosnia. SENTENCE 
HERE ON HOW THE FORTHCOMING CG MEETING AND HOW THAT 
WILL BE A "STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION," OR SOMETHING. 
POSSIBLE ADDITIONAL SENTENCE ON HOW OTHER POSSI-BILITIES 
ARE WORTH EXPLORING. 
I look forward to seeing you at the end of the month in New York --
not just to concert our efforts on Bosnia but also to ensure a successful 
meeting of our Presidents in October. 
24 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698129 Date: 07/25/2019