[Page 1]
C 0 6 69 51 6 2 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06695162 Date: 05/29/2019 
-SECRET/NO D IS 
DECAPTIONED 
EXECUTIVE SECRETARIAT 
Operations Center 
MEMORANDUM OF TELEPHONE CONVERSATION 
DATE: 
TIME: 
Friday, July 29, 1994 
0926 EDT 
PARTICIPANTS: The Deputy Secretary and Japanese FM Kono 
SUBJECT: Framework Talks on Government Procurement 
AH; 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
FM Kono told the Deputy Secretary that he called an emergency meeting of concerned cabinet ministers July 28 to consider the government procurement negotiations. Kono noted the discussions were quite heated, but nonetheless produced results for Deputy FM Hayashi to carry to Washington. While making clear that there are some principles on which Japan cannot compromise, Kono said the package given to Hayashi grants full consideration to U.S. concerns. Kono expressed concern that Title VII identification would damage the U.S.-Japan partnership. He asked that the Deputy Secretary make clear this concern at the highest levels. 
The Deputy Secretary agreed with Kono's assessment of the importance of the relationship. • He noted the identification of Japan under Title VII has already been delayed twice and, given its strong case and year-long discussions, the U.S. sees no reason for further delay. He pointed out that identification under Title VII does not mean immediate retaliation, but rather the beginning of a 60-day consultation period. He emphasized the U.S. will identify Japan under Title VII if there is no agreement by July 31. The Deputy Secretary noted that, upon his arrival, Hayashi had no package to present to Deputy USTR Barshefsky, but that we were pleased to hear that a proposal would be coming so that negotiations this weekend could produce a solution. 
Kono stressed that both sides should make maximum efforts and that the framework talks should have no time limit. The Deputy Secretary stated that there is an opportunity for a breakthrough, given that the procurement issue falls entirely under the purview of the Japanese government. 
Kono noted that it was approaching midnight in Tokyo, and he would like to tell the waiting press that both sides .had promised to work very hard to resolve the procurement issue. The Deputy Secretary concurred, and observed that Kono's presence in his office at such an hour makes clear that the issue is receiving the necessary ministerial-level attention. He assured Kono the issue is being watched at the same level in Washington. 
The call concluded at 0955 EDT. Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, 
A/GIS/IPS 5/15/2019 
Drafted:JP Desrocher Approved:WFDavnie 
 T/NODIS 
DECL: OADR 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06695162 Date: 05/29/2019