[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 8 2 0 8 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698208 Date: 07/25/2019 
RELEASE IN FULL 
September 17, 1996 
Chris: 
The attached report from Tom Pickering on his meeting with Primakov is interesting in a 
couple of respects. For whatever it's worth, the dual apology for his misbehavior over the 
Stuttgart speech and his cracks about our Iraq and U.S. domestic politics are unlike 
anything I've ever seen. That doesn't mean that Primakov's apology should be taken at face 
value. (A quotation comes to mind. When Castlereagh died, his archrival Metternich 
mused suspiciously, "I wonder why he did that." I wonder the same thing when Primakov 
says he's sorry.) 
On the substance of NATO-Russia, there's both good news and some of the opposite 
' here. Primakov seems to have backed off from some of the more unacceptable and 
mischievous aspects of the Afanasyevsky position, but he's still far from endorsing the 
Mamedov position. His comment to Tom that the paper I gave to Mamedov is a step 
backward is, well, a step backward. You'll recall from my memo that Mamedov agreed to 
the approach in the paper, but said he couldn't yet adopt it as a "joint" paper because he 
had more work to do in bringing Primakov on board. I talked to Mamedov by phone 
today. He's in London seeing Lynn Davis and the Brits. "Our "common approach still has 
promise," he said, but warned that he hasn't finished some work necessary his home office, 
"So we still can't call it a joint paper." 
Tom's view is that Primakov is moving in the right direction but has a ways to go. Tom 
will work on him some more. Solana will have at him in Vienna. I'll have at Mamedov 
here on Friday. If you're around and your sked permits, 15 minutes with Mamedov might 
be well invested. There is also a possibility that it might be possible for me to see 
Primakov for a kind of non-meeting on Long Island on Sunday afternoon or evening 
(Brooke.and I are going to be in East Hampton; Primakov may be at the Russian dacha in 
Glen Cove). This could serve somewhat the same purpose as that pre-meeting I had with 
Kozyrev in NY during one of our many rough spots with him. 
37 4
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698208 Date: 07/25/2019