[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 8 6 8 12 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686812 Date: 02/09/2021 
FfARNARE)IJNFVEFOTY 
JOHN F. KENNEDY SCHOOI, OF GOVERNMENT 
Strengthening Democratic Institutions Project • 
Preface 
RELEASE IN FULL 
The letter that follows is the advice from a father to a son. 
The subject: what he would tell the30 Russian General Officers 
who participated in the September 1992 Harvard Program for Russian 
General Officers. The lather is Lt. General William J. McCaffrey 
(US Army retired), a veteran of 37 years in uniform. The son is 
Lt. General Barry McCaffrey, Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff. 
In making his own presentation to the Russian Generals, 
General Barry McCaffrey distributed his father's letter. He made 
vivid his father's vision of the day when the eldest McCaffrey's 
grandson (Captain Sean McCaffrey) will command an American 
battalion alongside a Russian battalion. 
Echoing views,expressed by his boss, General Colin Powell, in 
"a presentation made to the Russian Generals a year earlier, the 
younger General McCaffrey told the participants "the US is safer 
when Russian military forces are strong, well-trained, and capable 
of carrying out your mission." 
Because the elder'McCaffrey's letter speaks so clearly to the 
heart of the emerging partnership between America and democratic 
Russia, the Project has reproduced it in both Russian and English. 
Graham Allison 
Harvard's Strengthening Democratic Institution's Project works to catalyze and provide support 
for three historic transformations taking place in Russia And the other republics of the former Soviet 
Union: to sustainable democracies, free market economies and cooperative international relations. The 
Project is a private, non-profit research initiative funded by the Carnegie Corporation and the Ann and 
Gordon Getty Foundation. Views expressed by individuals associated with the Project represent their 
own professional judgments and are not offered on behalf of any governments or other institutions. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686812 Date: 02/09/2021