[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 1 6IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
RELEASE IN PART 
B6 
August 12, 1993 
President William J. Clinton 
White House 
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
Dear Mr. President: 
With the situation in Bosnia being given daily news coverage of 
from one-half to a_full page in The New York Times and the Boston 
Globe and reading of the pressure being exerted by members of the 
past administration as well as by the government of Turkey for the 
United States to get involved in air strikes as well as committing 
ground troops to fight in defense of the Bosnian Muslims, I became 
very concerned that.your administration could be pressured into 
such a commitment before the situation had been thoroughly anal-
yzed as to the results of such a move and the far reaching conse-
queces. 
As an Armenian-American, I became very curious when I saw so much 
adverse publicity being directed at the Serbs, especially on the 
part of Turkey which has been demanding that on humanitarian 
grounds, the European countries and especially the United States, 
should commit ground troops to protect the Muslims of,Bosnia and 
to force the Bosnian Serbs to accept a separate state of Bosnia-
Herzegovina. This concern by a nation which in the past has never 
shown concern for Muslims being persecuted or killed elsewhere, 
be it the Palestinian Muslims of the West Bank or Gaza, the Muslim 
Kurds in Iraq, Iran, or in Turkey 'itself, or the Muslims in India, 
caused me to want to find out why the concern now. 
For a nation with a past history of ethnic cleansing of its own 
conquered peoples over more than 600 years of the Ottoman Empire, 
the nore recent Nistory of violence against its own Kurdish Muslims, 
the ethnic cleansing of more than 40% of the Island of Cyprus of 
the Greek Cypriots, and the tacit backing pf the attempts by its 
own Azeri Turk relatives to ethnically cleanse the Nagoro-Karabagh 
autonomous region of its indigenous Armenian population, it struck 
me as very unusual that Turkey would all of a sudden be concerned 
about the welfare of the Bosnian Muslims. 
Therefore, before starting this letter, I felt that I should study 
the historic background of the region to better understand why the 
Turks had suddenly developed this "humanitarian" interest in the 
area and why the Serbs of Bosnia had reacted so violently to Bosndla 
declaring its independence from Yugoslavia. 
With this in mind, I read two books, A History of the Balkans, 
by Ferdinand Schevill, and Serbs and Croats, The Struggle in Yugo-
slavia, by Alex N. Dragnich. I discovered that the Slays first moved 
south of the Danube around 700 AD and from these South Slays evolved 
the Croats and Slovenes, who became Roman Catholic and maintained 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
C 06 6 8 6 91 6 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
2. 
ties with Rome initially and later with the Germanic tribes that 
moved into the area, and the Serbs and Bulgarians, who became Greek 
Orthodox and maintained ties with the Eastern Roman Empire. 
The Serbs maintained good relations with the Greeks from 800AD to 
1200AD and during this period, in 1165, effected a Serb Union which 
continued until 1217 AD when Serbia became a kingdom. It attained 
its greatest bloom from 1331 to 1355 AD and continueduntil it was 
defeated by the Ottoman Turks in 1371 in Maritsa in Trace and in 
Kosovo, the heart of Serbia, in 1453. 
Although initially the Ottoman Turk did not destroy the Serb state, 
after the fall of Constantinople in 1453, the Ottoman Turk moved 
north into Bosnia, which was mainly Serb but independent of the 
Serbian Empire being ruled by feudal lords, and conquered it in 
1462. Montenegro was the only part of Serbia not conquered by the Turk. 
As the Ottoman Turk MoirednOrth, successive migrations of Serbs moved 
north toescape the tyranny of the Turk since they refused to become 
- Moslem and were, therefore, 'treated as chattle at the mercy of their 
Turkish overlords. Only' in Bosnia the nobility adopted Islam in 
order -foiaMtairi -fh-eir 44.,§bitions and property, and althpugh ofithe 
same -blood as the Serb peasants, became oppressors of the Christians 
Who constituted a majority of the people of the region. These nobles, 
called begs, still spoke the Serb tongue but were among the most 
fanatical Muslims of the Balkan penninsula and for all practical 
purposes became Turks of Serb origin. 
The Turks pushed north and west and twice laid siege to Vienna in 
1529 and 1683 but did not succeed against the Austrians and Hungarians 
in part because of the Military Frontier, Krajina,which was popul-
ated largely by Serbs and others who had fled north before the in-
vading Turk. These Serbs were given land, much of it having been 
abandoned by Croats and others who fled further north, and were 
given other privileges in exchange for their willingness to assist 
in fighting the Turk. ( The large Serb majority that resulted in 
this area was to become a serious problem in 1941, when it was 
massacred by the Ustashi Croats, and in 1991, when Croatia proclaimed 
it was seceding from Yugoslavia.) 
The waning of Ottoman power was signaled by two Serbian uprisings, 
in 1804 and 1815, which led to the resurrection of the Serbian 
state and by mid-century resulted in Serbia gaining defacto indep-
endence. Its formal recognition occured in 1878 at the Congress of 
Berlin. However, during this same Congress, the great powers allowed 
Austria-Hungary to occupy Bosnia-Herzegovina which it then annexed 
in 1908. It wasn't until.after the Serbs fought and defeated the 
Turks in the Balkan Wars in 1912 and 1913 and then fought on•the 
allied side in WW I against the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires 
that the opportunity arose to create a free Slavic state or states. 
In 1917, representatives of all three South Slavic peoples met on 
the Island of Corfu and outlined as their goal a South Slav state 
or Jugoslay. During this meeting, it was decided that the state 
would be a constitutional, democratic, and parliamentary monarchy 
with a Serb dynasty at the head. Aside from the dynasty, Serbia 
didn't ask for privilege status or veto power. Serbia was willing 
to give up its own constitution, its own flag, coat of arms, and 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 8 6 91 6 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
3. 
other national symbols. The leader of the Serbs, Nicola Pasic, 
stated that Serbia didn't 7ant to force Croats and SloVenes into 
the union.He wanted all Serbs to unite and if the other south Slays 
wanted to join voluntarily, they vere welcome to join; otherwise, ' 
they could remain as they were under foreign rule or at best be 
left to create independent states on small pieces of territory. 
Since a Croatia consisting only of lands with Croatian majorities 
was not a large area, the Croatians didn't want to separate at 
that time. 
By the end of WW I, there were 13,000,000 Jugoslays of which less 
than 1/2 were Serbs, less than 1/4 Croat, and less than 1/12th.' 
Slovenes.. On December 1, 1918, Serbian Prince Regent Alexander 
proclaimed the creation Of the. Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes 
with himself as constitutional monarch whose actual powers:. were 
_limited._Parliamentary.electionS_were held on Nov. 28, 1920 for 419 
seats_in :the:Constituent Assembly. The leader of the Croat Repub-
lican Party, Stjephan.-Radic boycotted thé Constituent Assembly. 
This act was accompanied-by the proclamation of a Croat Republic. 
( AT-that time,• he did not lay claim to certain land areas that 
.the.new-Croatia claimed in 1991-92, since these land areas were 
Serb occupied lands that were given to Croatia after WW II by Tito.) 
By 1925, Radic andlthe Croats departed from their past position 
so that Croats headed 4 ministries in the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, 
and Slovenes. However, by 1928 the atmosphere in sessions of the 
parliament became unbearable so King Alexander took personal power, 
abolished political parties, and ruled through his cabinet.Most 
of the important posts were given to Croats. By the fall of 1929, 
he changed the name of the country to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. 
He reduced the country's 33 administrative districts to nine 
called banovinas. 
Despite all his efforts, his regime became.unpopular so that in 
Sept. 1931, he formally brought his personal rule to an end and 
established a system best described as a guided democracy. During 
the period that followed up to his assassination on Oct. 9, 1934 
by Croat extremists, he did everything to keep the country together. 
By making concessions to the Croats, he had hoped to break down 
Croat resistance to the nation of Yugoslavia; instead, it caused 
them to unite in opposition. He had hoped to see Serbs more 
unified; instead, he saw the disintegration of Serb political life. 
After the assassination of King Alexander, Prince Paul took over 
as regent since Alexander's son, Peter, was only eleven. Prince Paul 
appointed a prime minister and also named three Croats to his 
cabinet. However, because of disagreements in the cabinet, the 
prime minister resigned in June 1935. 
With the appointment of a new prime minister, efforts were made to 
resolve the Croatian question; however, the Croatian leader, Vladro 
Macek,was in no hurry to solve the question since he was convinced 
that international tensions would force a resolution of the question 
on more favorable terms than he might get otherwise. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 8 6 91 6 7IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
4. 
By April 1939, Macek kept increasing Croatia's territorial demands 
and the prime minister had reached agreement with the Croat leaders. 
However, this was not acceptable to the regent, Prince Paul, one 
reason being the opposition of the Muslim leaders to the taking of 
territory from Bosnia for Croatia, and the other being the Serbian 
leader's fears that a plebiscite would result in a million and a 
half more Serbs finding themselves inside a new Croatian unit. 
Macek used the threat of foreign backing to force more concessions 
from the cabinet and the crown so that on'August 26, 1939, a new 
agreement was announced. That same day, the cabinet resigned and 
the prime minister formed a new cabinet in which Macek became vice-
premier and five other members of his party received ministerial 
posts. A'large geographical unit known as the Banovina of Croatia 
was,:createdmhichlincluded:territory-mainly and traditionally 
inhabited-byCroatians as well.as most of Slavonia (mixed Serb and 
Croat), Dalmatia (mainly Croat with a sizable Orthodox population), 
and parts of Bosnia-Herzegovina (Serb, Croat, and Muslim). Approx-
imately.one quarter of the=new.banovina's total population of 4.5 
million was Serb. The Banovina of Croatia was to have its own 
popularly elected_parliament and a governor appointed by the King. 
Since- a large majority of the Serbs in the banovina felt that . 
they would not be masters in their own house, they felt forced to 
demand creation of a Serbian unit *tthin the banovina. 
Soon after the agreement was signed, WW II broke out in September. 
When the war broke out, the Serbs, more concerned with national 
interests and national survival, generally favored putting the 
creation of their own banovina aside. 
The Croatian authorities soon placed restrictions on Jews who had 
fled from Germany and established internment camps for pol.itical 
opponents of the banovina regime. There arose among the militant 
Croats a terrorist organization, the Ustashi, tnder the leadership 
of Ante Pavelic, which was based in Italy. 
Once France fell, the British were in no position to offer assis-
tance to Yugoslavia. However, they expected the Yugoslav govern-
ment and army to resist Nazi pressure to adhere to the Tripartite 
Pact of Germany, Italy and Japan. The Croat and SlOvene leaders 
vere in favor of signing the pact whereas the Serbs were strongly 
opposed. 
Although British Prime Minister Churchill told Prince Paul that 
neutrality was not enough, the only hope of the Yugoslav govern-
ment was to delay long enough so that Hitler might leave them alone. 
Therefor, on March 25, 1941, Yugoslavia signed a pact with Germany 
whereby Germany would respect the sovereignty of Yugoslavia, the 
Axis powers would not during the war demand the right of passage 
or the transportation of military forces through Yugoslavia, and 
Germany would not ask Yugoslavia for any military assistance. 
Because of the lack of confidence in the existing cabinet, a military 
coup overthrew the cabinet. The coup leaders declared young King 
Peter of age and ousted Prince Paul as regent. However, the new 
prime minister declared that the new cabinet would abide by all 
international agreements that Yugoslavia had signed. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 5]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 1 EIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
5. 
The coup, although in the interests of Great Britain was suicidal 
for Yugoslavia. Hitler ordered a massive attack in April 1941 which 
ended the life of the First Yuaoslavia. Less than a week after the 
outbreak of hostilities, while the Yugoslav army was still defending 
the nation,an Axis satellite, the so-called Independent State of 
Croatia,which included Croatia and Bosnia, was established under 
the leadership of the Croat Ustashi leader, Ante Pavelic, who entered 
the country with the invading Italian troops. Other parts of Yugo-
slavia were ceded to Italy, Hungary, and Bulgaria. The remainder 
of the state was divided into two occupation zones: one, German, 
composed mainly of Serbia, and the other, Italian, centered in 
Montenegro and areas northward especially in DalliaEia. 
_Following Hitler's attack on the Soviet Union, Pavelic declared war 
- On .ihe-S-oviet Unian and sent at least a division to fight on the 
. Eastern Front; He. also seni thousands of workers from Croatia to 
Germany to assist in,,the German war effort. After Pearl Harbor, 
he also declared war on the United States and Great Britain. 
In Croatia,_he promulgated decrees to deal with opposition, real 
or inaginary. Under these decrees, a great number of his Serb 
subjecta, as well as Jews and Gypsies, were massacred or driven 
out. The generally accepted number of Serbs massacred is between 
500,000 and 700,000, the number of Jews, about 50,000, and the 
number of Gypsies, 20,000. As can be seen, most of the victims were 
Serbs who were either carted away to death camps, shot on the spot, 
or thrown alive into ravines. Others were herded into Serbian 
churches which were then set on fire. Women and children were not 
spared. 
Through this example of ethnic cleansing, the Serbian population 
of Bosnia-Herzegovina,which was almost 50% of the population before 
WW II, was further reduced.to where it was.only 34% by the end of 
the Tito regime. 
In Serbia not long after the occupation, some troops of the Yugo-
slav army fled into the hills rather than surrender to the Germans. 
They began an uprising under the command of Colonel Draza Mihail-
ovic and became known as the Chetniks. After Mihailovic's activities 
became known in the West, the Yugoslave government-in-exile in Lon-
don promoted him to general and named him minister of war. 
Initially, the Chetniks had no political aims other than to assist 
the Allies in dergeating the Axis powers. However, once Germany attacked 
the Soviet Union, the Yugoslav communists, lead by Tito, a Croat, 
organized a competing guerilla organization, the Partisans. Because 
of this, Mihailovic worked out a liberal, democratic program and 
declared that the Yugoslav people should be allowed to determine 
their own political future once they were free, in order to counter 
the political moves that the communists might make. 
In the fall of 1941, Tito and Mihailovic met to discuss a common 
front against the Germans. When Mihailovic realized what the real 
objectives of Tito were, he drove the Partisans out of Serbia. 
They retreated mainly into Montenegro and some went into hiding 
in the fascist Crciatian state where they found some recruits among 
the Serbs who had fled the Ustashi massacres. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 6]
C 0 6 6 8 6 91 6 7I ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
6. 
By mid-1942, charges were heard from the Tito camp with the help 
of the Soviet Union that Mihailovic was collaborating with the 
Germans in order to discredit him and to get more aid from the 
Allies for the Partisans. By September 1943, aid to Tito had 
increased greatly and the little aid that had been given to the 
Chetniks was cut off. However, there were few Partisans in Serbia 
when the Red Army crossed into Yugoslavia so that the Red Army was 
welcomed by the Chetniks who were then liquidated by the Red Army. 
After the Red Army captured Belgrade, it was turned over to Tito's 
forces. Once established in Belgrade, Tito threw all pretenses 
aside and introduced a reign of terror not only against real or 
imagined collaborators but also against the middle class and the 
intelligensia. He was able to take over Yugoslavia and set up a 
Soviet type of Federal Sygtem. 
There. were -six-republics-established: Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, 
BosniarHerzegovinau. Macedonia, and Montenegro. Tito weakened Serbia 
by leaving many Serbs.in-S11-of the other republics other than 
_Sloveni-a.=-Morethan 1,4500,000 Serbs were in Bosnia-Herzegovina which 
was created as a separate republic because of the large Moslem 
,population,there-,whichwas 45%-of the total, the Serbs were 34% 
__and the_Croats 17%. In 19714the inhabitants of Bosnia-Herzegovina 
vere even encouaged to. declare themselves ethnically Moslem which 
-:was very unusual for. a supposed communist, Godless state. This was 
-the,-only_7provin6e7-where-this was standardl)ractice. 
A further insult to the Serbs was forcing the Serbs to accept two 
autonomous provinces within their own republic, Kosovo and Vojrodina. 
Kosovo, which was the cradle of the Serbian nation, is the area 
where the most cherished christian monuments, monasteries and 
churches are located. It was here that the Serbian army suffered 
defeat at the hand of the Ottoman Turk in 1389 and was not regaihed 
from the Turk until the Balkan Wars of 1912. During the intervening 
centuries, many Serbs fled Kosovo to escape Turk enslavement while 
the Turks sent in more and more Islamized Albanians who engaged 
in massive persecution of the Serbs who had remained there.(ethnic 
cleansing). Even so, by the end of WW II there were still more 
Serbs there than Albanians. 
However, during Tito's communist regime, Kosovo Albanians wasted, 
no time in the ethnic cleansing of the Serbs by the continual and 
brutal persecution of the Serbs. Local communist leaders looked 
the other way as this was being done. Although Kosovo was an auton-
omous province of Serbia, it was ruled as if it were a sovereign 
state. The nationality policy of the communists resulted in the 
Serb population of Kosovo shrinking to 12%. 
Even after the death of Tito in 1980, in the post-Tito decade, the 
prime-ministership was held by a Serb only once and he was from 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. In the critical year of 1991, The Serbs didn't 
hlod the prime ministership, the foreign affairs ministry, or the 
chairmanship of the collective presidency. The minister of defense 
was the son of a mixed-Serb-Croat marriage. 
These facts were ignored as Slovenia and Croatia, in 1991, began 
demanding the reorganization of Yugoslavia.as a loose association 
of sovereign states. Some Slovenes and Croats spoke of a confed-_ 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 7]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 1 6IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
7. 
eration. These demands were increased in early 1991 with declar-
ations that if their demands were not met, Slovenia and Croatia 
would secede. Prior to the acts of secession, the Slovenes and 
Croats proposed a new constitution. Under it, the government would 
have consultative powers only. Under such a system, Serb interests 
anywhere outside of Serbia could not be protected by the national 
government or the government of Serbia. With more than 30% of all 
Serbs living outside of Serbia and Montenegro, Serbia could never 
agree to such a constitution. 
In the political stalement of mid-summer, both Slovenia and Croatia 
held referenda which indicated that the marority of the people 
wanted to secede, The Serbs living in Croatia and Bosnia were the 
descendants of the survivors of the 1941 massacres when Croatia 
was„an Axis satellite during WW II, and going back further, were 
the-0-sterldhethtiKiTirlio_protected Austria-Hungary's citizens, 
(inciuding Croats) on the military border, the Krajina, from the 
Ottoman Turk. 
These.concerriS 'led-the Seib leaders to hold a plebiscite in their 
a-reas-_of Croatia:- Ttajina,--on the Croatia's 'border with Bosnia-
Heriegovinaj aiid-SfaVdnia -and Western Srem, in which at least a 
third and' in some areas onehalf of the population was Serb. 
-The'reettiti'indicated that should Croatia remain part of Yugoslavia, 
the resident Serbs would be satisfied with cultural autonomy. However, 
if Croatia were to secede, the Serbs would be satisfied with nothing 
less than annexation with Serbia. 
Despite this warning, Croatia's leaders declared Croatia's eecession 
from Yugoslavia. This resulted in bloodshed in Croatia between the 
Croatian militia and the armed group of Serbs representing the 
600,000 to 800,000 Serbminority living in Croatia. 
It appears that the same thing happened in Bosnia. The only differer.ce 
being that if it hadn't been for the ethnic cleansin2 of the Serbs 
that had been accomplished by the Ottoman Turk for almost 500 years 
and the massacre of the Serbs by the Ustashi Croats in 1941, the 
Serbs would have been a majority and-Bosnia would have rernained a 
part of Yugoslavia. 
However, onbe Bosnia decided to secede from\Yugoslavia, the Serbs 
wanted no part of remaciking within Bosnia. The Serbs were not about 
to put themselves at the mercy of the 45% Moslem and 17% Croat 
coalition. After having been persecuted by the Ottoman Turks and 
their surrogate moslem "Serbs" for almost 500 years and then being 
massacred by the Croat Ustashi regime in 1941, while under German 
occupation and defensless, it's completely understandable why they 
refused to remain a part of Bosnia. 
What is especially troubling is the manner in which the demise of 
Yugoslavia was hastened by the European Community which was supposedly 
promoting a peaceful solution for maintaining the integrity of 
Yugoslavia. For the European Community to be pressured by Germany 
and Austria to recognize the independence of Slovenia and Croatia 
without delay, without waiting for the outcome of negotiatiOns and 
thereby speed up the destruction of another European state is 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 8]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 1 6IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
8. 
unbelievable. And even more amazing, was the Bush administration 
following so soon after recognizing Slovenia and Croatia and then 
moving ahead of the European Community in extending diplomatic 
recognition to Bosnia-Herzegovina, a nation that never existed 
as a nation before, without consideration for the concerns of 
the large Serb minority or the reaction that could follow. 
To the Serbs, this was a final irony. After all the human and 
material sacrifices that the Serbs had made in the Balkan Wars 
aswell as during both World Wars as allies of the democratic 
west,they were thoUghtlessly disregarded at the behest of others 
who had been the enemies of the democratic west. 
After my study ofthe history of the Balkans, it became apparent 
why Tu.rkqy-;the--_nat-i-on-thWhas benefited Lbermost from ethiic 
cleansifig arid-the nation-With—bile 7pT,the poorest histories of • 
human rights šuddénly became so concerned about the plight of 
the Bosnian Muslims. It became clear that these Bosnian moslims, 
although originally ethrii-calZySerbs, upon conversion to Islam 
mixed-sufficiently with_their Turkish conquerors to become Turks 
fotTail:pfa6tiCal-purpasea-and are probably viewed as šuch by the 
Bosnian-Serbš. 
..It also)pecame apparent. why..the Bush administration took the lead 
in-recognizing-the independence-of Bosnia without considering the 
past history of the area and the feelings of the large Serb minor-
ity which was opposed to it, a minority that only became a minor-
ity after the Astashi Croat massacres of the Serbs in 1941. 
To allow a new nation to be formed based on an artificially 
created plurality of a religious unit, the Mbslem, which didn't 
even exist in the area before 1462 AD is establishing a nation 
on very shaky grounds and will be an even more unstable entity 
than either Northern Ireland or Lebanon, both nations which were 
carved out from their rightful mother countries, Ireland and 
Syria, to satify religious minorities. and have had problems ever since. 
Yes, it appears that in this case, the Bush administration wanted 
to curry favor with Turkey which is again trying to present itself 
as a most loyal ally, now against the "dangers" of a fundamental-
ist Iranian regime. Turkey, a nation which during WW I was allied 
with Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire and during WW II stayed 
on the sidelines selling strategic materials to Germany until a 
few months before the war in Europe ended, at which time it joined 
the allies only to protect itself from the Soviet Union. 
The Bush administration, controlled by big business, was probably 
lured by the prospects of unlimited business opportunities which 
will be made available by Turkey through its anticipated "leadership" 
'of the former Turkic republics of the Soviet Union. It appears that 
the Bush administration didn't take notice of the fact that Turkey, 
even with an annual grant of 3/4 billion dollars from the United 
States, is itself on very shaky economic grounds, so much so that 
its exchange rate which was 9 Turki-sh lira per U.S. dollar in 1959 
is now 9,570 lira per dollar and climbing. In fact, since last 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 9]
C 06 6 8 6 91 6IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
g. 
Fall, the Turkish lira has risen more than 1000 lira per U.S. 
dollar. 
As an Armenian-American I resent the constant attention being forced 
on the world by the disaster brought on by the premature creation 
of the state of Bosnia and the constant demands being made on the 
European countries and the United States to use military power 
against the Serbs while at the same time, everything appears to 
be done to keep the plight of the newly independent republic of 
Armenia and Nagoro-Karabagh out of the news. 
I agree that moral outrage should be expressed throughout the 
world when excesses are being committed by the Bosnian Serb, or 
the Bosnian Croat against the Bosnian Muslims. But where was the 
morAl.outrage-when_pogrome=were cOnducted by the Azeri Turks 
-_against-the-Armenians-in-Sumgait and Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan, 
---a-completely-defensless.community of over 250,000 Armenians among 
a_total_Azeri_pop_ulation_of over 2,000,000, which was forced to flee 
for theiT:_limes:=tootherpa:rts of the Soviet Union and to Armenia. 
These were Armenians whose families had lived in Sumgait and Baku 
for hundreds-of years, many of them not even knowing the Armenian 
language. Their only sin was-being ethnic Armenians and Christian 
and their ethnic cousins in the republic of Armenia were asking 
that Nagoro-Karabagh be a p'art of Armenia where it rightfully 
„belongs.-.(Although-NagoroKarabagh was an autonomous region within 
Azerbaijan,it had an7=indigenous Armenian population of more than 
80 % of the total population of the region that dates back to 500BC, 
more than 1300 years before there was ever an Azeri Turk in the 
area. It was never a part of Azerbaijan until 1921, when Stalin 
placed it under the administrative authority of Azerbaijan, as 
a part of the pact made with Kemalist Turkey when the Independent 
Republic of Armenian was divided between the Soviet Union and 
Turkey). 
Where was the moral outrage of the United States and the world 
when Azerbaijan blockaded the Soviet Republic of Armenia in 1988 
and even continued the blockade after the horrible earthquake in 
the northweetern sector of the country destroyed Leninakan, killing 
from 25,000 to 75,000 Armenians, and leaving over 500,000 homeless, 
many of them refugees who had only months before fled from the 
pogroms in Azerbaijan. Where was the moral outrage of the world 
when materials and pre-fabricated buildings,which were being sent 
by other countries to help rebuild Armenia, were confiscated and 
destroyed by the Azeris. How much more inhuman can a people be 
than the Azeris to deny a nation the opportunity to rebuild after 
such a natural calamity. Do you realize that a majority of the 
homeless from the earthquake of Dec. 7, 1988 are still living in 
the most primitive of quarters and have just spent their fifth 
winter without adequate heat or electricity? 
Where was the moral outrage of the United States and the world when 
the Azeris had completely blockaded Nagoro-Karabagh from even having 
access to the blockaded republic of Armenia, so that no supplies 
whatsoever could be received overland by the 200,000 Armenians, and 
the only remaining method of supply, that of air transport, was 
endangered by Azeri forces that controlled the town of Khojalu 
near the Stepanakert Airport, the only airport'in Karabagh? 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 10]
C 0 6 6 8 6 91 6 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
10. 
During this period, there was very little news in the American 
press as to what was happening. No, the only outrage at this time 
was expressed when, on February 29, 1992, units of the Karabagh 
defense forces chased Azeri army units out of Khojalu and the 
American press reported that the town and been taken resulting in 
many civilian casualties, leaving the false impression that the 
attack had been directed against the Azeri civilian populaticn. 
The fact that the assault was directed against Azeri army units 
which were threatening the last remaining supply line to Karabagh 
was downplayed. A11 the months that the Azeri army units in Khojalu 
had been bombarding Stepanakert with Grad missiles indiscriminantly, 
resulting in mostly Armenian civilian casualties, there had been 
no mention of this in the American press. 
Where was the-outrage of the United States and the world when 
--- -Stepanakert; the-capital -of-Nagoro=Karabagh, was constantly being 
- bombarded with Grad missiles by Azeri army units in.the .city-of' 
Soushi, the controlling heights overlooking Stepanakert? It was 
wily after months-of-this constant bombardment that the Karaba.ch 
- Armenian-defense units, with only one Grad missile battery taken 
from the Azeris, captured Soushi on May 16, 1992, and then in order to 
establish a land corridor between Armenia and Karabagh, continued 
on to capture Lachin on May 23. 
Dutingsthi's-period-,--the--Armenians of Karabagh fought with no. help 
-from the gOverPMent of Armenia but were assisted by those political 
groups in Armenia and the diaspora who felt that in no way could' 
the Armenians of Karabagh be deserted. 
Through the summer and fall, the Azerbaijan army continued trying 
to retake the Lachin corridor and also attacked areas of Armenia 
proper without success. Then when winter set in, both Karabagh 
and Armenia were subjected to a complete blockade by the Areris. 
The only source of materials and fuel to Armenia, except for the 
little that could be flown in, were the rail line passing through 
western Georgia and the natural gas pipeline passing from Russia 
through eastern Georgia into Armenia. The raii line was sabotaged 
by Azeris living in southern Georgia more than once and the natural 
gas pipeline was blown up five times. With the pipeline requiring 
at least a week or two to repair each time, very little gas was 
getting through so that most Armenians were living in homes with 
temperatures of 35°F most of the winter.Ala the trees in the capital 
of Yerevan were cut down for fuel but this did little to alleviate 
the situation. Most hospitals were closed because the lack of heat 
and the few that were open had temperatures of less than 40°F. 
During this period, most of Armenia had less than two hours of 
electricity per day, and although arrangements were made by the 
Armenian government to buy electricity from neighboring "neutral" 
Turkey, little electricity was delivered, Turkey's contribution 
to the blockade. Where was the moral outrage of the United States 
and the world over the devastation caused by the blockade? 
After surviving the winter, the Armenians of Karabagh and Armenia 
proper were again subjected to a major offensive in late March by 
the Azerbaijan army, which was attempting to cut off the northern 
region of Karabagh from the rest of Karabagh and to overrun the 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 11]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 1 6IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
11. 
Lachin humanitarian corridor. There vas no outrage expressed at 
the resumption of hostilities until after the Karabagh defense 
forces foiled this major offensive and then mounted an offensive 
of its own and captured the region of Kelbajar in the north from 
which the Azeri offensive had been mounted. This then created 
another corridor between Armenia and Karabagh. It was only then 
that Secretary of State, Christopher condemned the Armenian 
offensive and the U.N. Security Council demanded that the Karabagh 
defense forces withdraw. 
It was at this time that President Ozal of Turkey, a supposedly 
neutral country, stated that "Armenia has not learned a lesson 
from its experience in Anatolia and has forgotten the punishment 
inflicted upon it". Of course, he was referring to the genocide 
t-perpetrated:-by-the-Ottoman Turkish government.upon the defenseless 
-ArMeftia- of the'OttOmall Efitire in 1915. What he didn't realize 
is that the-ArMenians hAvernot forgotten and for this very reason 
they will not-lay down,their arms and trust the Turk and the other 
nations of the worldto-determine their fate.They did that once 
before. - 
-The punishment,that President Ozal was referring to on April 15, 
1993, was the massacre of over 1.5 million Armenians out of a 
total population of more than 2 million Armenians who were lluing 
on7.Distoric-Armenian-lands-as subjects of the Ottoman Empire at 
the start of WW I. In order that they not be accused of disloyalty, 
the Armenian young men went into the Turkish army to serve. Once 
they were in the army, they were disarmed and placed in labor 
battalions and were then never heard from again. On April 24, 1915, 
over 200 Armenian intellectuals in :Lstambul, the leadership of 
the Armenian millet in Turkey, were rounded up and were executed. 
Then the deportation of the remaining Armenian population of 
eastern Anatolia, the older men, women, and children took place. 
They were rounded up on one days notice and were driven on foot 
towards the Syrian desert, for some more than 200 to 300 miles 
away. They were escorted out of their cities, towns and villages 
by Turkish troop and gendarmes, who instead of providing an escort 
for them, took part in the wholesale slaughter of the defenseless 
population. Many young women were taken along the way to be used 
in Turkish harems and others were subjected to the most brutal 
treatment before being killed. Both of my grandmothers perished 
along the way as well as an aunt, her husband, and two children. 
One uncle. was kept behind to work with a Turkish medical unit 
and he was never heard from again. Only one aunt and a first cousin 
survived. 
For the president of a nation,which up to this time has denied 
that it perpetrated a genocide against the Armenian nation, to 
use this act of imfamy in order to intimidate the descendants 
of the survivors of the genocide of 1915 should show something 
of the character of the Turk. 
Has the Turk no shame? For the past five years, Azerbaijan, a 
nation of 7 million with unlimited fuel and materials at its 
disposal, has blockaded the 200,000 Armenians of Karabagh and 
the 3.5 million Armenians of the Republic so completely that they 
barely survived this past winter. Despite this, the Karabagh self-
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 12]
CO 668 6 91 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
12. 
defense forces with some help from the Armenians of the republic, 
using arms mainly taken from the Azerbaijan army, have so succ-
essfully defended themselves against the Azerbaijan army that 
Turkey, a nation of 50 million has resorted to threats to retal-
iate against the Republic of Armenia. Is this the type of brave 
ally that we can depend on? 
Please Mr. President,for the good of your administration and the 
nation, take the State Department out from under the influence 
of the Turkish Lobby so deeply entrenched there by Henry Kissinger 
and his cohorts during the Nixon-Ford administrations. This is the 
lobby that has, convinced past administrations of the importance 
of Turkey.as: a reliable ally in our fight against Communism.In 
Feality,except for seri-ding a 5,000 man contingent to Korea during 
the Korean War (Greece also- sent a 5,000 man contingent at that 
time), Turkey haa-only,uSedjts NATO arms and troops to subjugate 
its large Kiirdith ttilnority and-to invade the independent nation 
of Cyprus in 1974 when, under the pretext of protecting the 19% 
of the population of Cyprus which vas ethnically Turk, it occupied 
40% of_theisland, themost desirable northern sector.This resulted 
ih_mOre thah-26.0,0b0-G-feek-Cypriots fleeing to the southern sector 
Of ihe i.61a7id.-bdiin-§-tile -invasion, more than 2,000 Greek Cypriots 
disipl5dared-ii.eva-t t-be Se&i-a4ain. c5_ 
Despite this mass uprootal of the Greek Cypriot community, within 
a few years, the southern part of the island was again thriving 
with an annual inflation rate of 4% whereas the northern, Turkish 
occupied sector was experiencing runaway inflation. 
As for our bases in Turkey, during the Johnson administration 
when Turkey had threatened to invade Cyprus on a pretext to protect 
the Turkish minority there,and the Johnson administration had used 
the U. S. Sixth Fleet to discourage the invasion, Turkey placed 
restrictions on our use of the bases. At another time, I believe 
it was during the Yom Kippur Way, Turkey did not allow us to use 
these bases during our resupply of Israel. And for all of the 
above, we have been giving Turkey almost 3/4 billion dollars a 
year to keep them as our ally; I'd say a pretty good deal for 
Turkey considering the little,that it has done to promote dem-
ocracy in the world. 
As an Armenian-American I can see many parallels between the plight 
of the Serbs in Bosnia and the Armenians in Karabagh. 
Bosnia, although not integrated into the Serbian kingdom in 1217AD, 
was, nevertheless, a part of the Serb nation since most of the 
population was Orthodox Christian Serb. Even after 1453AD, when 
the Serb nobility adopted Islam, and after nearly 500 years of 
Turkish domination, the majority of the population was Orthodox 
Serb. In 1918, Bosnians elected to be a part of the South Slav 
nation or Yugoslavia, and up until 1941 and the German occupation, the Bosnian Orthodox Serbs were still in the majority. It wasn't 
until after the Utashi Croats' most vicious form of ethnic clean-
sind, the wholesale massacre of the defenseless'Serb:poptlation, 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 13]
C 0 6 6 8 6 91 6 .IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
13. 
that the Orthodox Serb became a minority, but still a large minor-
ity of 34% of the population which it maintained throughout the 
Tito Communist regime. and up to 1992. 
Despite the past history of persecution of the Serbs by the Bosnian 
moslems and Croats and being warned that the large Bosnian Serb 
minority was adamantly opposed to being part of a state with a 
majority coalition made up of the two groups responsible for their 
-persecution in the past,- the Bush administration and the European 
community did not hesitate-to accept Bosnia as an independent 
state. This callous disregard of the past history of the area 
contributed to the further disintegration of the sovereign nation 
of Yugoplavi.a and,--in.effect, was responsible for the resulting 
- case of-Nagciro-Ka-rabagh-, Armenians have populated this 
77,7' -- -regiot-since-500- mote-Lthan 1500 years before any Turkish 
-tribe movedAnto-Asia Minor--; By the end of 1918, the population 
was more than 90% Armenian and Nagoro-Karabagh would have been 
a,part_of the_Republic_of Armenia .if not for the duplicity of 
commander-Pf.th itith-military force in Baku, Major General 
-William Thomson. 
Although Azerbaijan considered Nagoro-Karabagh within its terr-
itory, it was populated over 90% by Armenians and had never been 
in the hands of the Tatars or Turks. In October 1918, the Turkish 
army which had been pushed out of Baku, drove into Shushi, one 
of the main cities of Nagoro-Karabagh, and although the Armenians 
in Shushi submitted to the Ttrks, the other sections of Nagoro-
Karabagh refused. The Armenians in these other areas requested help 
from General Antranig Ozanian who had established Armenian control 
over Zangezur, a region of Armenia just south of Nagoro-Karabagh, 
and he started a drive into Nagoro-Karabagh. By this time, WW I 
was just ending so that General Thomson informed General Antranig 
that since the war was over, further military activity by the 
Armenians could adversely affect the solution of the Armenian 
Question. Because of this, General Antranig halted the offensive. 
Once he stopped, Moslem bands razed three Armenian villages 
between Zangezur and Nagoro-Karabagh, thus isolating Nagoro-
Karabagh from the Republic of Armenia. Once isolated from the 
Republic of Armenia,Shushi and other areaS between Nagoro-Karabagh 
and Armenia, including the Kelbejar region> were ethnically 
cleansed of Armenians by the Azeri Turks. The remainder of Nagoro-
Karabah resisted takeover by the Turks thus maintaining an Armenian 
majority of at least 80% in Nagoro-Karabagh. 
During this same period, the region of Nakhichevan, which had a 
majority population of Armenians and was isolated from Azerbaijan 
by the Armenian control of Zangezur, was incorporated into the 
Republic of Armenia. 
Asanaftermath of WW I, in order to right the catastrophic wrong 
that had been done to the Armenian nation, the "Little Ally" 
of the Allied cause, the Treaty of Sevres called for an independ-
ent Armenia that included not only the newly created Republic of 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 14]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 1 6IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
14. 
-7. ;14.1 u 
Armenia but also the six provinces in eastern Turkey, Anatolia, 
which had been completely ethnically cleansed of Armenians by 
the genbcide of 1915. If the Treaty of Sevres had been ratified 
by the United States Senate and the United States had accepted 
a mandate over the newly established.republic as President Woodrow 
Wilson had insisted, a thriving nation would have resulted which 
would have been an ally of the West during WW II and would have 
been a much more reliable ally against communism than the bankrupt 
nation of Turkey which has been barely surviving economically 
Nith U.S. aid of up to 750 million dollars per year. 
However, the U.S. Senate, controlled by the Republican Party, 
refused to ratify the treaty even though one of its leaders, 
-Henry-Cabot-Lodge, of Massachusetts had been a staunch supporter 
of an independent Armenia and had even been a member of the 
American Committee for the Independence of Armenia. It appears 
-that -.business iinterests-ich as usual control the pc4ities 
Republican Party,==--had been offered business concessions 
--in-Turkey-by-the new-Turkish government. 
__Thus, after_surviminglor_2-1/2 years, from May 28, 1918 until 
-"Novembex 29, 1920,nthe-freely_elected governemt of Armenia was 
forced to surrender to the Soviet Army whichattacked Armenia -: 
from the-east rather than allow the Turkish army, which was attacking 
from the west, to take over and massacre the remainder of the 
Armenian population. 
It was soon after,in 1921, that Nagoro-Karabagh and Nakhichevan 
were placed under the administration of Azerbaijan by Stalin as 
a concession to Turkey. During the 70 years of the communist 
regime, Azerbaijan ethnically cleansed Nakhichevan of Armenians 
so that by 1992, less than 5% of the population was Armenian. 
In Nagoro-Karabagh, Azerbaijan was not able to achieve the same 
success. Although every attempt was made to prevent the Armenians 
there from maintaining their language and culture and life in 
general was made difficult for them in order to encouraget.themtto 
leave, a more subtile method of ethnic cleansing, the population 
remained more than 80% Armenian. 
Because of the continued harassment of the Armenian population 
of Nagoro-Karabagh by the Azerbaijan government during 70 years 
of Communist rule during which the complaints of the Armenian 
majority were ignored by the central government in Moscow, with 
the advent of Peristroika, in February 1988 the Parliament of 
Nagoro-Karabagh petitioned the central government that Nagoro-
Karabagh be united with the'Republic of Armenia. This move had 
the tacit approval of President Gorbachev uhtil Azerbaijani 
nationalists reacted violently and committed pogroms against the 
defenseless Armenian populations of Sumgait and Baku in Azerbaijan, 
at which time a plan was advanced to place Nagoro-Karabagh under 
the direct administration of the central government in Moscow. 
This resulted in the blockade of not only Nagoro-Karabagh by 
Azerbaijan but also of Armenia itself with the tacit approval of 
Turkey. Sonn after, the indiscriminate bombardment of the Armenian 
populations of the capital, Stepanakert, and other towns and 
villages of Nagoro-Karabagh commenced by the Azerbaijan army. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 15]
C 0 6 6 8 6 91 61F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
15. 
After several years of blockade and constant bombardment by the 
Azeri army, the Karabagh self defense forces defeated the Azeri 
army forces within Nagoro-Karabagh and forced them out. However, 
the constant bombardment of the villages and towns of Nagoro-
Karabagh by the Azeri army continued from locations within Azer-
baijan and even villages and towns within the Republic of Armenia 
were bombarded. This resulted it the Karabagh self defense forces 
attacking the areas outside of Nagoro-Karabagh from which the 
Azeri army was operating and thus even more Azeri territory was 
-conquered. 
Because of the past catastrophe that befell the Armenians of the 
Ottoman Empire in 1915 and the continued harrasment and persecution 
of- the-Armenians tt--Nagoro-Karabagh by the Azeri Turks,dthèrlabbnians 
of Nagoro-Karabagh are determined to never again be placed at the 
msrcy tt the'Azeri Turks. -Therefore, in 1991, Nagoro-Karabagh 
declared its indepèndente -after a referendum. However, although 
moret-=than80% -iidf thd- -poPiaation wanted independence from Azerbaijan, 
-77no—country would recognize its independence, not even the govern-
ment of Armenia, which bowed to pressure from the U. S. State 
-Department and Turkey. - . - 
As-an Armenian-Atherican-who has lived with the memory of my closest 
relatives being-persecuted and- mas-sacred by the Turks, I can under-
stand the reaction of the Bosnian Serbs who, after 500 years of 
persecution at the hands of.the,Ottoman Turks and their surrogates, 
the Bosnian Mnsldms, and their bloodbath at the hands of the Utashi 
Croats in 1941, are determined to never again place themselves at 
the mercy of the Bosnian Musldm or the Croat, especiallly a combin-
-ation of the two. 
In the past, the Bosnian Serbs were willing to be under the admin-
istration of the Bosnian Musldms, since, over the centuries, the 
Bosnian Muslims, being of the nobility, had the experience to 
administer and the Bosnian Orthodox Serbs, 1"eing mainly of the 
peasant class, were more interested in farming the land. As long 
as the Bosnian state was a part of a larger entity, the nation of 
Yugoslavia, they had no fear of being persecuted by the Bosnian 
Muslims or Croats since the central governmentin Belgrade would 
not allow this to occur. In an independent Bosnian state, the 
Bosnian Serb minority would not have this security blanket. 
At this point, I feel the Bosnian Serbs are being honest. They know 
the Vance-0wen plan is unfair and unworkable and are refusing to 
accept it come hell or high water. They are not going to accept the 
plan only to sabotage it later as the Croats would probably do. 
The Bosnian Croats and Muslims were being praised for accepting 
the plan and why shouldn't they accept it. They, especially the 
Croats, would be getting control of more territory than they could 
gain otherwise. Although the Croats are only 17% of the population, 
they would gain control of more than 30% of the iandi The Bosnian 
Muslims, although 45% of the population, are mainly located in the 
cities and more densly populated, yet they would gain 40% of the 
land area. The Bosnian Serbs, on the other hand, although 34% of 
the population, would gain control of less then 40% of the land. 
area, although as farmers, they probably own or work more than 
50% of the land. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 16]
C 0 6 6 8 6 91 6.IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
16. 
Since Nagoro-Karabagh vas never a part of Azerbaijan before 1921 
and even after that date, because of its large Armenian majority, 
was an autonomous region and never became an integral part of 
Azerbaijan, independence would have had little effect on the 
integrity of Azerbaijan. 
Bosnia, on the other hand, with a large Serb Orthodox minority 
and with the majority of the Bosnian Muslims of ethnic Serb 
origin, had become an integral part of Yugoslavia since 1918. 
Thus, recognition of the indepeidence of Bosnia was sure to 
create havoc, become a threat to the Orthodox Serb population 
living there, and complete the destruction of the nation of Yugo-
slavia. 
-Despite -thiei recognitiOn of=the independence of Bosnia was immed-_ iately gitren=by'the' Bušh adffilnistration and the Eurppean Commun-
- ity and=was denied -Nagoro-Karabagh. 
7---It-'applare ---that---ther,pritabiee lbfbusiness concessions throughout 
the newly independent Turkic republics of the former Soviet Union 
-was the instrument used by Turkey to push through the immediate 
recognition of the independence of Bosnia by the Bush administration 
regardless of the cost of such recognition to the people of Bosnia 
just as the. promise-of - these-eame concessions as well as the promise 
of-oil well developement -contracts with Azerbaijan were the-instru:n 
ments used by Turkey and Azerbaijan to deny recognition of the 
independence of Nagoro-Karabagh by the Bush administration. • 
Months have past since I started this letter and luckily, due to 
the refusal of the nations of the European Community to agree to 
multilateral air strikes against the Bosnia Serbs, your adminis-
tration wisely refrained from taking unilateral action.It's amazing 
how the Bush administration, which was conned by Turkey into recog-
nizing an independent Bosnia thereby creating the resulting chaos, 
did nothing to try to stop the carnage early on when something 
could possibly have been done before so much Killing and._destruction 
had taken place. Instead, the Bush administration played it safe 
before the election and did nothing and once they had lost, kept 
out of the fray in order that you would have the_sole responsi-
bility for whatever resulted. It was then that sone of the leaders 
of the Republican Party and some of those most closely identified 
with companies doing business with Turkey\were the most vociferous 
in demanding that your administration take action against the Serbs 
unilaterally or otherwise. If your administration had done so,it 
would have become mired in a mess just as the Carter administration, 
having taken the advice of Henry Kissinger and David Rockefeller 
and allowed the Shah of Iran into this country for medical treat-
ment, became immeshed in the hostage crisis from which it never 
escaped. Here again, the Republica.is of the past administrations 
were trying to con a Democratic administration int.o another no-win 
situation that could have doomed your administration and resulted 
in many more years of Republican misrule. 
As a lifelong Democrat, I was especially outraged when some members 
of the State Department demanded that unilateral action be taken 
in opposition to your Secretary of State who was wisely refusing 
to do so. I would really question the motives and loyalties of 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 17]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 1 6IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
17. 
of those individuals who over the many years of Republican admin-
istrations have formed a very strong Turkish lobby within the 
State Department. I was also very upset by those Congressmen and 
Senators of the Democratic party who were trying to push your 
administration into taking such steps. 
Please Mr. President, don't let the business interests of this 
country, especially short term interests, influence your ability 
to do that which is right. Past history must be considered in 
order to arrive at just solutions and to right the past wrongs 
which have been done to both the Serbian and Armenian peoples. 
In order to arrive at a just solution for the problems in Yugo-
-,slavikv-one must not_only con-sider the ethnic cleansing that has 
:_--been-_taking___pkace,in.Bosnia_during the past two years but the 
ethnic cleansing that was perpetrated by the Albanian Muslims 
against the Serbs in Kosovo during the Tito regime, by the Croatian 
1-----Utashi—in-Croatda -and-Bosnia in 1941, and by the Ottoman Turks 
_and their surrogates _during 500 years of their rule in the area. 
If these previous_ethnic c.leansings had not taken place, there 
would .have been no ethnic cleans).pg in Bosnia today. 
In -order to arrive at- a -just-solution for the Armenians of Nagoro-
Karabaghvimmediate_steps mu-s-t- be taken to lift the brutal block-
ade which has been imposed by Azerbaijan and supported by Turlsey 
over the past five years before the self-defense forces of Nagoro-
Karabagh are asked to leave the Azerbaijan territory they now 
occupy. Iron-clad guarantees must be established with a U.N. 
force in place to prevent Azerbaijan army units from entering 
the areas from which they had been bombarding the Armenian civ-
ilian population over the past five years before any territory is 
relinquished. 
One must remember that it was just a two week blockade of the 
Straits of Tiran by Egypt in 1967 that was considered an act of 
war and was used as justification by I,srael to attack the surr-
ounding Arab nations and start the 6 day war which established 
Israeli control over the Sinai pennisula, the Gaza strip, the 
Golan Heights, and the West Bank. Although U.N. resolutions 
demanded that Israel relinquish the conquered territories, the 
Sinai was not returned to Egypt until a peace treaty was signed 
and the remaining areas are still controliedby Israel 25 years 
later. The control of the remaining areas, or parts of these 
areas, will not be relinquished until a comprehensive peace 
treaty is signed. 
Why should the Armenians of Nagoro-Karabagh be treated differently 
and be required to relinquish territory before guarantees are in 
place. 
Please Mr. President, help dispel the myth that Turkey is indispen-
ible as .a loyal ally. For years near the end of the 19th. Century, 
Great Britain protected Turkey as a bulwark against Imperial Russian 
expansionism. Following the Turko-Russian War of -1877, the Ottoman 
Empire was again saved from Russia by the intervention of Great 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 18]
C 0 6 6 8 6 91 EIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
18. 
Britain under its Kissinger-like prime minister, Disraeli, 
Although it was the Orthodox Serbs of Herzegovina that rose up 
against the Turks in 1875, during the Treaty of Berlin in 1878, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina was surrendered, to Austria rather than to 
Serbia by the European powers. Later it was annexed by Austria. 
It wasn't until after WW I, during which Austria was allied with 
Germany and Turkey, that Bosnia-Herzegovina was taken from Austria 
and elected to become a part of Yugoslavia. 
Although Russia had Aefeated Turkey during the Turko-Russian 
War, during the same Treaty of Berlin, Russia was not allowed 
to occupy the eastern sector of Anatolia, the center of the 
_L_= _Armenian nation -stnce before-500 BC, which would have placed 
twol-mia-ltowArmenians-living in the area under Russian 
controlinsteadl,:GreatBritain, through its Tory prime minister, 
putl7business7concernsTbefore justice and humanitarian 
L'---interett-s-,an-At-the-tArmeiriians- were left under the control of the 
- LttoMan Empire:-.Thiš then-resulted in the massacre of more than 
--300“)00 Armenians-by-Sultan-Hamid's government from 1894 - 1896 
,;and-the-genocide,',of 1.5 million Armenians by the Young Turk 
government in 1915. 
Although Great—Britaim-haAprotected Ottoman Turkey during the 
--later-part .of-the 19th. century, Turkey, this"valuable ally", 
joined the entente with Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire 
in 1914. 
Even after Germany and Turkey were defeated and the survivors 
of the Armenian nation had contributed to the allied cause on 
both the Caucasian and the Palestinian fronts, the newly estab-
lished Independent Republic of Armenia, the Little Ally, was 
deserted by Great Britain and the Republican Congress and was 
allowed to be divided between Turkey and the Soviet Union in 
December, 1920. What could have been a really loyal, dependable, 
and self-sufficient ally against the threat of Communism,was 
betrayed for business and oil interests. 
Instead, the free world had to depend upon Turkey, a nation which 
was allied against the free world during WW I and which did not 
commit itself to the cause of the free world in WW II, remaining 
neutral and supplying strategic materials to Germany. In fact, 
during WW II, the young Armenian men still living in the small 
Armenian community of Istambul, were rounded up and moved to the 
interior of Turkey where they were kept until the tide of the 
war in Europe turned against Germany at Stalingrad—If Stalingrad 
had fallen, I have no doubt that these young men would have been 
killed and in all probability Turkey would have entered the war 
on the side of Germany so that it could move into the Soviet 
Republic of Armenia and complete the genocide it started in 1915. 
It wasn't until the last few months before the end of the war in 
Europe, when it was safe to do so, that Turkey finally joined the 
Allied cause, thus placing herself under the protective arm of the 
victorious Allies since the Soviet Union could claim the eastern 
provinces of Turkey as a part of Soviet Armenia under the Treaty 
of Sevres. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 19]
C d6 6 8 6 91 67IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
19. 
Because of the fear of Soviet Communism,the United States was 
allowed to build bases in Turkey. However, the use of these bases 
was always conditional upon our looking the other way at any 
wrongdoing or human rights abuses by Turkey. The use of these bases 
has even been used as blackmail by Turkey to force past U. S. admin ,L 
istrations to prevent the passage of Congressional resolutions 
condemning the genocide of the Armenians by the Ottoman Turks 
in 1915. How dependable is an ally that is of such amoral char-
acter as to deny committing the first genocide of the 20th. 
Century? 
Now -that the Soviet Union has collapsed and the fear of commun-
ism has disappeared, Turkey is now using our fear of fundament-
alist Iran to maintain its position as an indispensible ally in 
-order -to Continue getting financial aid from this country with 
411fdli'i'O'in'achtWi]hTei'fiiegal occupation of Cyprus, its suppression 
df .its large KurdishminofitY, and to pay public relation firms 
-in this Country t6 deny Tr the genocide of the Armenians in 1915. :  
What_Ve_must realize.is Olat although Iran is a theocracy at 
t-presin,the makélnii bk the government is bound to change and we 
abObt-this change by reducing our confrontational 
attitude towards Iran. 
iiartedthis confrontation by taking over the U.S. 
EmbaSSy'ifiteliia'n-iiidfididing our embassy officials for over 2-1/2 
years, in the end, all the hostages returned home unharmed. On 
the other hand, the Reagan administration gave arms and other 
assistance to Iraq when it attacked Iran at its weakest moment. 
The Reagan-Bush administrations backed'haked:aggreSsionlagaitst 
Iran that resulted in the deaths of almost one million Iranians 
during eight years of war. They even overlooked the use of poison 
gas by Iraq against the Kurds in Iraq. Isn't it about time that 
we consider the score even and make an attempt to bring about a 
conciliation between our two countries? 
What we must realize is that Iran has a civilization and culture 
that goes back more than 3,500 years and even the mullahs will 
not be able to keep Iran in this backward mode for long since the 
Iranians are a very intelligent and industious people. 
Iran, over the centuries, has allowed minorities to maintain their 
cultures and indentities and to flourish thus enhancing the cultural 
and economic life of their country. Although an extreme fundamen-
talist, Muslim government is in control at this time, the Christians 
in the country, such as the Armenians, are respected as one of 
the peoples of the Book and have been able to practice their rel-
igion without discrimination. In fact, in most of the Muslim 
countries of the Middle East, the Christian Armenian communites 
have been allowed to flourish without discrimination. 
Only in Turkey have the remaining small Christian communities 
of Greeks and Armenians been called by the derogatory term "giaour" 
meaning unbeliever. Turkey has been the only country where these 
Christian minorities have been discriminated against so strongly 
that many have dropped the Armenian or Greek endings of their 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 20]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 1 6IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
20. 
names in order to blend into the scenery. Only in Turkey do these 
Christian minorities find roadblocks placed in their way by the 
government to even repair their churches. Only in Turkey do these 
minorities live a very uneasy life never knowing when something 
may happen to set the Turkish mobs on a rampage. In fact, in 1955, 
because a bomb had been explodednear the tomb of Kamal Attaturk, 
the founder of modern day Turkey, the Greeks were blamed for this 
and the Turkish mobs-All Istambul rioted for 3 days and destroyed 
all the Greek businesses on the "Fifth Avenue" of Istambul.More 
than 80 Greek churches were destroyed and some of their priests 
were killed. 
Although the then civilian government of President Mendares 
claimed that the mobs could not be controlled,a few years later 
his'government was-overthrown by the military and President 
---Mendareš kas-not only-chirged with corruption but was also accused 
:of Ihttigating-the-,riots":-Tor this he was hanged. 
After the rioting, the Greek population of Istambul, which was 
about 100,000 before the riots, quickly reduced to half that number. 
fact, many-of the few-Greeks and Armenians still living in 
'.:7=Istarilbul-:14o.u-Id have, leffIonl-ago except for the fact that if they 
sell their properties and businesses, they would not be able to 
take any money with them. 
Another minority in Turkey, the largest minority, the more than 
10 million Muslim Kurds, have been discriminated against since after 
WW I. In fact, in 1938, the Turkish government even attempted 
genocide against the Kurds in eastern Turkey. However, because 
of their large numbers and the fact that many lived in the moun-
tains, the government was not successful in this endeavor but 
was able to cow-the Kurds into hiding their identity as Kurds. 
Up until 10 years ago, the Turkish government denied that they - 
were Kurds and said that they were mountain Turks. They were not 
allowed to teach the Kurdish language and culture and were not 
even allowed to speak Kurdish. Although they make up almost one 
fifth of the population of Turkey and are a large majority in the 
eastern sector of Turkey, everything has been done to prevent 
them any form of self rule. 
Desert Storm, which encouraged the Iraqi Kurds to revolt against 
Saadam Hussein and should have been carried further to eliminate 
the Republican Guard, was cut short supposedly to maintain the 
integrity of Iraq. Actually, it was cut short in order to prevent 
the Kurds from establishing an autonomous region which could have 
developed into an independent country, something which President 
Wilson had proposed at the end of WW I as one of his Fourteen 
Points. Turkey was dead set against this, since if the Iraqi 
Kurds were to establish an independent country, the Kurds in 
Turkey would not be far behind in demanding their independence 
from Turkey in order to be combined with Iraqi Kurdistan. 
What you must realize is that most of the countries of the Middle 
East have had cultures and civilizations dating back thousands 
of years. Only Turkey has a culture that has been based on military 
conquest and the continued subjugation of the conquered subjects 
through fear instilled by periodic massacres. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 21]
C 0 6 6 8 6 916 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
21. 
For centurues, officials of the Sultans of Turkey visited Christian 
villages within the Ottoman Empire and selected a certain number 
of the most promising boys between the ages of 14 and 18 who were 
then forcibly taken from their families for service to the Sultan. 
These youths were converted to Islam and were drafted into the 
civil or military service. The whole regular army was made up of 
these former Christian boys some of whom formed the infamous 
Janissary Corps. From the ranks of these boys, upon becoming men, 
the Sultan appointed all the important officials of his realm. 
-7. 
The Sultans thought that by incorporating the more industrious 
and intelligent elements of their realms, those of the Christian 
communities, into the Turkish culture by making them Turks, the 
caliber-of-7the-Turkish nation would be improved. Instead, once 
„__:_.---being-absorbe07-into7.the7iTurkish community and adopting the Turkish 
-culture,Ahat_pf-Jivins,:off—theefforts of others like parasites, 
-,,--..ti-ley,:becamea—dangerous liability to the Sultan so that by 1826, 
the Janissary Corps was disbanded and this practice was discon-
_: ,_41;
- : 
„After=thet-manyr-of-:thefinaricial and administrative positions 
__,,.inL:the.governmentwere-1--.7held bpXhristian Armenians Or Greeks. 
ITs,because. of-,this-that,in 1915 the "Young Turks", becoming 
alarmed that these Christians were superior to the:Turks in 
intellect and work ethic and were basically running the government, 
,--decided-to-eliminate-these-elements from the Ottonian Empire, the 
Armenians by mass deportation and genocide and the Greeks, by 
massacre and population exchange. 
Although many Armenian girls and young women were forced into 
Turkish harems during the deportations resulting in many children 
who were half Armenian, forced to deny their Armenian heritage 
and being brought up as Turks in the Turkish culture, this did 
little to enhance the quality of their abilities to be future 
leaders. What the "Young Turks" didn't realize is that in.addition 
to the native intelligence of the Armenians and the Greeks,it was 
the thousands of years of civilization and culture that created 
the driving force to propel these peoples to excel. Once they were 
eliminated or were forced to become Turks, this drive was no 
longer there. Otherwise, why is it that Turkey, which since 1920 
has not been involved in a war and whose soil has not been sign-
ificantly affected by war, is morally and financially on the brink 
of bankruptcy? When I started this letter in the Spring, the 
exchange rate was 9,570 lira per U.S. dollar. At present it is 
11,400 Turkish lira per U.S. dollar and,rising even more. If it 
were not for the 3/4 billion dollars in aid that this country 
has been giving to Turkey every year, who knows what its status 
would be today. 
I"m trying to point out that depending on Turkey for anything is 
a losing proposition. Turkey will only play one country against 
another as it has been doing for more than 100 years. Although 
Turkey and the Turkish lobby in our State Department will try and 
show how dangerous Iran is, don't believe it. As a fundamentalist 
regime, it isn't more fundamentalist that Saudi Arabia. In addition, 
the Iranians are Shiite Muslims as opposed to most of the popul-
ations of the other Muslim countries in the Middle East who are' 
Sunni Muslims. Also, the larger part of the Iranians are of 
Persian stock, Indo-European, whereas most of the populations 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date:02/09/2021

[Page 22]
C 0 6 6 8 6 916 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
22. 
of the other countries of the Middle East are Semites. Within 
Iran itself, there is a large minority of Azeri Turks who are 
of Mongol stock. Therefore, who are the Iranians going to be 
joining to present this giant threat to the world? If anything, 
they are a buffer to the real danger in the Middle East, Iraq. 
As for our dependence on Turkey as a foothold into the Turkic 
republics of the former Soviet Union, Kazakhastan is more than 
40% of ethnic Russian stock and has very close ties both ecoh-
omically and financially with the Russian Federation. The:leaders 
of Kazakhastan are too smart to get involved with a loser like 
Turkey.—EVen the other Turkic republics will not be too enthus-
iastic about getting involved with Turkey since Turkey will only 
attempt to use them for itS own advantage. In addition, some of 
them appear to.be liery unstable and could be liabilities like Turkey. . _ 
14;--ti.:YTPii-41.- ii.4-S7i—rightl:the wrongs that have been committed 
in.the past in order to atl5ease the business interests of.Great 
Britain and the United States. Much of the bloodshed taking place 
today, be it in Nagoro-Karabagh, Yugoslavia, or Iraqi and Turkish 
Kurdistan would have been avoided if decisions in the past had 
been bated of achieW-ifigiuitice and fair play rather than on 
"satifying busiheSS interests. 
In Tairheas tO the Boihian Serbs, there never should havebeen 
ilah-ndepehdent foYEid-Ciii them. For centuries they had 
_ • 
fought to free themselves from the control of the Ottoman:Turks 
and now they were being forced to accept a situation where they 
would be a minority controlled by a coalition of the Turkish 
surrogate, the Bosnian Muslim, and the Bosnian Croat, the two 
peoples under whose hands they had suffered in the past. 1 
Although one regrets the violent reaction of the Bosnian Serbs 
to an independent Bosnia, it should have been anticipated and 
avoided. The only fair solution at this point is partitionrof 
Bosnia since too much destruction has taken place and too much 
blood has been spilled to return to a multi-ethnic Bosnian 
republic within Yugoslavia. 
As for the State Department "expert" on Bosnia, Marshall Harris, 
who resigned over the idea of a partition plan being accepted by 
the State Department, it's amazing that he "can no longer serve 
in a Department of State that accepts thelorceful dismemberment 
of a European state" one which hadn't really started to even 
function, and yet was not upset over the dismemberment of the 
nation of Yugoslavia which had been in existence for overz75 years. 
I really question how ,much his actions were based on a true 
understanding of the history of the area rather than his prejudice 
as a member of the "Turkish Lobby" within the State Department. 
Earlier in the year, I had watched F. an interview on TV of George 
D. Kenney, another "expert" on Yugoslavia who had resigned from 
the State Department during the Bush Administration beca-use of 
inaction on the part of the administration to facilitate the 
forced independence of Bosnia. Either his grasp of the situation 
was superficial or else he only sounded superficial in order to 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 23]
C 0 6 6 8 6 9 1 6 F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
23. 
make his point in favor of using U.S. armed forces to help the f"-E 
Bosnian Muslims force an independent Bosnia on the Bosnian Serbs. -7.1 
Either way, his demise from the State Department was no great lossaI: 
In fairness to the Armenians of Nagoro-Karabagh, the United Statesn, 
should not be so quick to agree with the United Nations position i 1 
to force the Karabagh self-defense forces to abandon the positionsyr 
within Azerbaijan such as Agdam, Kebejar, etc. which were used by -71 
the Azeri army to bombard the civilian populations of Stepanakert 
and other Armenian-centers of Nagoro-Karabagh as well as towns 
within Armenia itself over the past 5 years. 
_ 
It was only after 3 years of constant bombardment of the Armenian i 
centers of Nagoro-Karabagh that the Karabagh self-defense forces 
were formed-ah aited fightinj back with very little modern 
equipment. It was only through deperation and 'against odds that 
the Karaba"gh serf-defense forces succeeded in pushing the Azeri . 2 
army OUt'of Shoushi in Nagoro-Karabagh, and then , mainly with 4-- 3 r ' -• 7-- T 
captured equipment,- continued to drive the Azeri army out Of the 
areas within Azerbaiian itself-which were being used to bombard , 
the Armenian civifiaii &pulation areas. 
After achieving these gains through much loss of life, the Karabaght 
self-defense forces should not be pressured by the United Nations- t 
or anyb-ne—elt-e to-abanddh—these positions in Azerbaijan until firm/i:: 
-juaranteetare-in-place-that will prevent the Azeri army from 
reoccupying these positions and resuming the bombardment of Armenian 
population centers. 
It's amazing that the U.N. and the United States is so quick to 
condemn the Karabagh telf-defense forces for retaining these 7- r 
positions and is demanding that they be abandoned immediately, 
and yet have done nothing over the past 19 years to force the 
Turkish army to pull out of Cyprus which it invaded and occupied vz 
almost 20 years ago with NATO arms and overwhelming military mightln 
Turkey achieved this with little loss of life to its forces, and t( 
not only has refused to pull its forces out of Cyprus but has-also ( 
recognized the independence of the northern 40% of the island as 
a Turkish Cypriot state against the objections of,the United 
Nations and the rest of the world. 
In the case of Israel, after its invasion of Lebanon in 1982, a 
which was condemned by the U.N., the Israeli army pulled back out r 
of Lebanon except from a strip in southern Lebanon which it retains 
till this day as a security zone. After more than 11 years, the 1 
Israeli army is still there for security purposes and nothing is .E 
being done to move them out. Shouldn't the Armenians of,Nagoro- ?IC 
Karabagh have the same right to defend themselves at least until N., 
some guarantees are established? 
A policy based on fairness and moral principles rather than -ir_e 
mercenary interests can have many benefits for your administration' 
and the Democratic Party. The business interests of this countryesi 
will never support the Democratic Party over the Republican Party.r.1 
They know that as much as the Democratic Party may try and plbasey 
big business, it will never support it to the degree that the .e 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 24]
C 0 6 6 8 6 91 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021 
24. 
Republican Party will since the Democratic Party still has a 
Conscience. 
On the other hand, a more even-handed and fair policy by your 
administration in considering the rights of the Armenians in 
Nagoro-Karabagh, forcing the end to the 5 year blockade of Armenia 
by Azerbaijan and Turkey, and pressuring Turkey to remove its 
troops and settlers from Cyprus, can bring many dividends. 
For years-after WW I, Armenian-Americans remained loyal to the 
Democratic Party,even after many became very well off financially, 
because of President Wilson's committment for a just, solution 
of the Armenian Question after WW I. They remained loyal well into 
_the_.1950s. However, overhe past 40 years, when both the Repub-
___- lican,and Democrrati,Admiaistrations allowed themselves to be 
,..blackmailedtly,:Turkeywso.much so that these administrations even 
-preiented_the.passage-,of,-Zongressional Resolutions commemorating 
. ,the.genocide_of theArmenians by the Ottoman Turk in 1915, many 
-!of,thesearmeniansrstarte'dtvoting their pocketbooks and became 
_Republican._ 
Although the total Armenian-American population in the United 
mayApe only.one-milliOn.:,-ot. so, with the large influx of 
- 7 -Armenians=into-theLos'Angel-es,area over the past 10 years, 
.there.,are-probably_more_-than-_-.500;000 in California alone. A more 
-even-,handed -approach-in-=our. relations with Turkey vis-a-vis 
Armenia, which is something that the Armenian-American community 
• can never expect from a Republican Administration, will create 
a very strong block of support for the Democratic Party which will 
be long lasting. 
• 
In addition, taking a just approach in the case of Cyprus, by 
pressuring Turkey to remove its more than 30,000 troops as well 
as more than 30,000 Turk colonizers that were taken to northern 
Cyprus after the invasion from mainland Turkey, will not go un-
noticed by the six million Greek-Americans in this country. They, 
like the Armenian-Americans , have done very well for themselves 
financially and at present are strongly Republican. Such a move, 
which is long overdue, would shift much support, both morally 
and financially, back to the Democratic Party. 
Please, Mr. President, consider what I have written. Please return 
.the Democratic Party back to its roots as the party with a con-
science. If you do this, I feel the dividends will be great both 
for your administration and the Democratic Party. 
Very truly yours, 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686916 Date: 02/09/2021