[Page 1]
C 6 6 8 6 9 6 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686968 Date: 02/09/2021 
United States Department of State 
Arnbassador-at-Large and 
Special Adviser to the Secretary on the 
New Independent States 
Washington, D.C. 20520 
August 30, 1993 
Dear Commissioner Weise: 
RELEASE IN PART 
B6 
I would like to bring to your attention an issue that may 
have important implications for U.S. diplomats serving in 
Moscow, for the efficiency of our communications operations 
there, and for the secure transmittal of information to our 
Embassy. The issue concerns the means by which Russian 
diplomats retrieve their diplomatic pouch at Dulles airport and 
the corresponding procedures for U.S. diplomats at Moscow 
airports. 
The Customs Service and the State Department have worked 
closely over the years at Dulles and other U.S. airports to 
ensure security while at the same time facilitating diplomatic 
travel and reducing the irritations associated with diplomatic 
baggage. Our cooperation has been gratifying. Thanks to the 
massive changes underway in Russia itself -- and to the quick 
response of the Customs Service to many of our requests -- we 
have been able to make life a little easier for Russian 
diplomats at Dulles, which helps ensure that our officials in 
Russia will retain their access at Moscow airports. we 
acknowledge and appreciate the fact that Customs has allowed 
Russian diplomats easy entry to the baggage and customs area at 
Dulles to perform their "meet and greet" functions. 
Concerning the specific issue of retrieving diplomatic 
pouches, our diplomats in Moscow enjoy substantially easier and 
more convenient access than do Russian diplomats at Dulles. 
Customs regulations at Dulles require that -- when the Russian 
official proceeds to the aircraft to retrieve the pouch -- he 
must be accompanied at all times by cleared airline personnel 
(usually from Aeroflot). In one recent case, the airline 
official was called away, the Russian official was left 
unescorted, and the airline was fined. We have received a 
number of complaints from the Russian Embassy in recent weeks 
about this regulation; because of the possibility of a fine, 
airline personnel are reluctant to take on the responsibility 
of escorting the Russian official, and pouch retrieval is 
becoming increasingly time-consuming and frustrating for the 
Russians. 
Mr. George J. Weise 
Commissioner, U.S. Customs Service 
1301 CQnstitution Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 20229 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686968 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
C 6 6 8 6 9 6 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686968 Date: 02/09/2021 
- 2 - 
As a result of their frustrations, the Russians have begun 
to imply that they may undertake measures at Moscow airports, 
on the basis of "reciprocity," to make retrieval of the U.S. 
pouch as time-consuming and frustrating as the Russian 
experience here. I would like to be able to head off such a 
tightening of the procedures in Moscow, and I hope that you and 
I will be able to agree on a means for doing so. I certainly 
have no intention of compromising airport security in any way; 
additionally, I do not wish to "bend" the regulations in favor 
of the RussianS. I believe, though, that a possible solution 
exists. 
Officials from the Russian Embassy recently told us that 
while on a pouch run at Dulles airport they were informally 
offered special training and certification from airport 
authorities that would allow them plane-side access. When a 
number of Russian officials arrived at Dulles for the beginning 
of the training, they were told that a mistake had been made, 
and that no such training was available to Russian diplomats. 
I would like to propose that such training be provided to a 
limited number of Russian Embassy officials here in Washington. 
With FAA and Customs certification, Russian officials could 
proceed unescorted to the plane and simply retrieve their 
diplomatic pouch -- as U.S. diplomats do in Moscow. 
I understand that this is an unusual request and that it 
will meet resistance from the agencies involved. We consider 
it extremely important, however, to maintain the ability in 
Moscow to retrieve our diplomatic pouches without interference 
or handling by local authorities. This access may be 
threatened -- or at a minimum, made much more difficult -- if 
we cannot respond to Russian concerns about problems at Dulles. 
This request is generated not in-an effort to-offer-the 
Russians special treatment and not:merely-to gdarantee-simple 
"convenience" for our personnel in-Moscow.--If-the Russians- --
choose to block our direct access to pouch-carrying aircraft,-
if they impose regulations that require--long-waits-=-and--delays,____ 
the efficient operation of the MoscöWEmb-assy communications-- ---------
unit will suffer. If an Embassy Moscow-communicator-is waiting 
at Sheremetevo airport in Moscow for-hours-at a-time, important 
security and communications functions' may-not be performed-at---
the Embassy with the necessary speed-.-- - 
Therefore, I hope we can arrange a satisfactory solution to 
this problem. I look forward to hearing your views. 
B6 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06686968 Date: 02/09/2021