[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 4 5 7 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690457 Date: 06/16/2021 
March 3, 1993 
To: Steve Oxman 
From: Strobe Talbott 
Subject: The Relationship between S/NIS and EUR 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Steve, the purpose of this memo is put on the record 
between us what I understand to be the relationship between 
our offices and responsibilities. You have been ex-
traordinarily collegial and supportive of what I'm trying to 
do in my newly created job, and I want to reciprocate by 
making sure that the arrangement not only makes sense in 
theory but works in practice to your satisfaction. 
-0-
1) As described in the Secretary's memorandum on 
reorganization of Feb. 5, ISCA shall remain in EUR but report 
directly to me. 
2) For reasons of special political sensitivity, the 
three Baltic states remain in EUR/EE. You and I will consult 
particularly closely on issues relating to the Baltics. It 
would help assure close coordination between your office and 
mine if Rich Kauzlarich continued to chair the informal 
Baltic/Russian working group he set up last summer. 
3) I have instructed Rich and Larry Napper to make 
sure that your office is copied on everything that comes out 
of ISCA. 
4) When Toria Nuland arrives to take up her post as 
my special assistant, I will instruct her to include among 
her duties keeping in close touch with Nancy McEldowney. 
5) Rich will do the same with your Principal DAS. 
6) Another useful arrangement would be for us to ar-
range that for cross-participation between our offices in our 
morning staff meetings. 
7) You and I will consult closely on matters where 
our responsibilities overlaps (examples: how to keep Russia 
on board our Yugo policy; Turkey's role in the Transcaucasus 
and Central Asia). 
s9 ISCA and the NIS posts will continue to be sup-
ported by EUR/EX. Sooner or later, the issue will arise of 
seeking more funding for the office and the posts. I'm com-
mitting myself in advance to making the case on a alobal 
rather than a regional basis. That is, I will do what I can 
-- and I hope you'll join me in this -- to avoid a situation 
in which ISCA is in competition with Central and Western 
Europe. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of•State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690457 Date: 06/16/2021