[Page 1]
C 0 66 9 0 3 5 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690358 Date: 07/22/2021 
THE DIPLOMAT 
31 Meadow Wood Drive 
Greenwich, CT 06830 
(203) 869-1199 
Romania 
- November 1993 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Arriving in the snow at night makes a city so much more charming and warm than seeing the 
flash of cars, empty buildings and concrete facades. I was so prepared to find Romania 
inhospitable and still ruled by the last regime that I was startled to be met at the airport by two 
people from the protocol office and then an absolutely charming lady from the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs Press Office. Even when I left JFK I didn't know who would be my welcoming 
committee. Carmen Podgoreanu was to be my hostess for my 7 day visit. I was the guest of the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, equivalent to our State Department. Her office had made 
arrangements for me to stay at the Triumf Hotel, once the home to King Carol Its mistress. In a 
parklike setting it was something out of a fairy tale on this crisp snowy night. The lobby was old 
European, sparsely furnished, but with draperies leading into a lovely dining room. Imagine my 
surprise on walking into my room to find a single bed ! However, it did have real linen sheets 
and a plush silk comforter. The bathroom left a little more to the imagination. Neither the sink or 
tub had plugs and the toilet (separate), a pull chain. The slightly ajar windows let in cold winter 
air. A fresh walk with Carmen to her apartment, where I met her son and father ended a long 
two day flight. 
Monday morning we started early 9AM visiting the Romanian Chamber of Commerce, the 
Romanian Agency for Development and the Romanian Agency for Privatization (don't you think 
I deserved a break, but this was what I was here for). To do research for my newsletter, The 
Diplomat. In the afternoon a charming lady took me on a partial tour of the Village Museum, 
one of Romania's real treasures. Opened in 1936 this beautiful park in the midst of Bucharest is 
home to examples of every style of Romanian architecture, textiles, pottery and other native 
crafts. My guide lived for several years in Cyprus and was a beautiful blond who loved to show 
off this magnificent place. We agreed to do it again before I left, as we ran out of time. 
However, while there, I did meet several ladies from the Balkan Women's Congress which was 
also taking place in Bucharest. Started two years ago this group of women from Romania, 
Bulgaria, Albania, Greece, Turkey and Cyprus meet each year in a different city with a special 
topic. This year's was journalism. The group included prominent female journalists, doctors, 
diplomats and women from every walk of life. I was to meet them later in the evening when I 
was guest at a special opera show dedicated to this Congress. There I was fortunate to be 
introduced to members of the various ministries, including their Minister of Foreign Affairs 
(equivalent to our Secretary of State) and the Chamber of Deputies. One young boy (8 years old) 
spoke fluent English and had never been out of his country. Another 18 year old girl lived for a 
year in Miami and wanted very much to return for her college years. 
Tuesday took us to the Ministry of Tourism where we let many ideas fly and particularly how to 
promote this country that had been behind the Iron Curtain since 1947. Romania is noted for its 
spas, mountain and Black Sea resorts. Of course after leaving this appointment, I had many more 
ideas and a later appointment was set up. An appointment was made for a site inspection of the 
Intercontinental with the assistant-manager. This is Bucharest's "finest". Done in browns and 
oranges, as were all the hotels we visited, even the "Presidential Suite" left much to be desired. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690358 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 0 3 5 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690358 Date: 07/22/2021 
Yes, it had two bedrooms, living and dining room and kitchen and could be had for several 
hundred dollars per night. But it was not up to New York standards. However, don't get me 
wrong. The Intercontinental is where the business people stay, with access to several dining 
rooms, a night club and health club. However, there were no paper towels or toilet paper in the 
public restrooms. I know! In the afternoon we visited the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (our State 
Department) meeting with the Chief of Protocol and .representatives of the Press Department. A 
late visit to the Museum of Folklore followed. I spent a long time that evening talking to the 
Canadian builder of the Romanian nuclear power plant and learned many of the difficulties of 
doing business in Romania. Outside the snow swirled viciously and I wondered if appointments 
would be kept. 
Wednesday morning we stopped for coffee and discussion at the apartment of the editors of The 
Diplomat Club, a publication for business people and the Diplomatic Corps. How we wanted to 
talk and visit and exchange ideas, but alas Carmen and I realized that we had an appointment 
with the Director of the National Museum of History and we could not keep him waiting. A 
short man, with the longest eyebrows I'd ever seen ( Carmen said they were a sign of 
intelligence!) he led us through Romania's other treasures, a treasure almost equal to King Tut - 
golden bowls, jewels, exquisitely molded,. breathtaking to the eye. Why didn't I know about 
these ? I'm sure much of the world doesn't realize that much of ancient history's gold came from 
Romania. No wonder the country was pillaged for thousands of years. But then, I went on to 
learn that many of these treasures were taken to Russia in 1947, perhaps never to return. Let's 
hope the negotiations work. We were then to meet with the Minister of Culture, who permitted 
me to interview him followed by lunch in a delightful Chinese restaurant. The day ended with a 
very important meeting with Mrs. Puvac, Secretary for Reform. I learned that she had just been 
a guest of our State Department and had spent time in Cleveland, where I had headed up the 
Council for International Visitors. We, of course discussed Romania's future. I also mentioned to 
her an organization, TechnoServ, which provides no financial support, but technical training. 
She was delighted and asked that I speak to them. The day ended with a sumptuous dinner in a 
Lebanese restaurant hosted by my new friends from The Diplomat Club, who brought along 
their eligible son! We might have headed off for one of the nightclubs, but alas, our driver had 
to get back to watch the Wales-Romanian soccer game, which Romania happily won, sending ---
them off to the world Cup here in the States next year. 
Thursday morning dawned crisp and cold. An early visit to VineExport introduced me to 
Romanian wines, which I had already had the pleasure to enjoy. The director was a charming 
man who filled in many gaps on my knowledge-of the wine, showing us around his showroom, 
explaining labeling and passing out several brochures, none of which had been printe-,1 in 
Romania. Even their labels are done in Italy. We didn't sample any wines, but 9AM was a little 
early and we had a full day still ahead. A brief stop' at the Bucharesti Hotel was an eye Opener. 
Drab and dark we were unimpressed. The Triumf was luxurious compared to this large hotel 
where many foreigners are put up. Carmen and I had lunch at the Triumf and then headed for the 
Ctoroceni Palace, home to former royal families and situated on a hill above Bucharest. Sadly 
the chapel and several other buildings had been torn down during the last regime, but will be 
rebuilt. The President also has offices in an adjoining building. Carmen then fixed a lavish 
Romanian dinner for me - tuica (plum brandy) and wine, both homemade; souff16, salads and 
sausage; pork, mashed potatoes, other salads; finished with cookies and lots of wine. Her 
husband and son joined us for a lovely late evening. They walked me back to the hotel in the 
snow and ice. In Romania streets are not always cleaned during snow storms for lack of 
equipment and the next day we were really to face this in driving north and in Brazov. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690358 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 9 0 3 5 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690358 Date: 07/22/2021 
With all the snow this week Carmen and I were fortunate to have had two excellent drivers, and 
now one willing to drive us to Sinaia and Brazov. As we drove north from Bucharest she 
explained where her country home was , about 40 kilometers north of Bucharest They and some 
friends had bought this- no nmning water and only now do they have electricity, brought in 
through a neighbor's house. Bathing is done in the- nearby river- and- a well supplies the water. 
For us it's not camping out, but I prefer the Ritz. As we headed further north snow and ice-filled 
the road, as did slow trucks and cars. Our driver was fearless, passing all. Our arrival in Sinaia 
was heralded with a slippery climb to the International Hotel, where we did a sight inspection. 
The lobby was dark and cold, but the rooms not bad, very eastern European and not lacking in 
furniture and amenities. Driving into the village I was astonished by its beauty. Unlike other 
Austrian or Swiss ski resorts Sinaia was uniquely Romanian in architecture. With two castles 
and lovely other buildings I found this a secret paradise. Set in the snow on a cloudless, blue sky 
day I couldn't imagine being in a more beautiful spot. Thank goodness I brought my camera. 
Walking around town was slippery, but the tour of one castle, and a private tour of the other was 
worth the whole trip. Thank goodness for Carmen's connections. Arriving in Brazov we 
wandered in the 15th c town, much of it looking, I'm sure, as it did several hundred years ago. 
Here one hears German and sees the German influence. The streets were very slippery and our 
lunch was some sweet rolls sold from a cart. We wandered to the Black Church, but found it had 
closed only a few minutes before. Heading uphill we could see the cable car up the mountain, 
lovely older homes, and then found a cemetery with a small chapel. Going inside Carmen 
explained about lighting candles for the dead. I told her my role in the Episcopal Church. She 
bought candles and several books, explaining she had not been to church in years. I rnay have 
been a good influence on her. Returning to our car we both fell on the ice. Ouch! But on arriving 
and settling in she poured us some family tuica which warmed us up and sat back for the drive 
back to Brazov. In the cold and dark our driver did an amazing job on some ic'e coVered roads. 
Saturday morning Carmen and her son picked me up at the hotel to go to a monastery. About 50 
kilometers from Bucharest the road was rough, but when we entered it was like being in another 
world. Frescos lined the outside walls of the enclave and a chapel. and museum sat in the center. 
After questioning someone about entrance to the chapel we were guided to qhe chief monk. We 
entered his chilly quarters and were presented with -cold coffee He- told me- I- was the -first 
Anglican he had ever met. He has spent some time recently studying in France and hoped to 
return if he could find the airfare. We were taken on atour of the museum which has one of the 
finest monastery painting collections in the country. How gorgeous they werc. and dip bishOps' 
robes. Once again Carmen bought some books and I gave the Monk what probablkinibunted to 
his yearly salary. It won't get him to France, but might keep him warm over what will be a very 
long winter this year. Leaving the monastery we headed fof Mogosaia, once a palace and then 
used by writers over the last few years. In disrepair,_ it Siti lonely on a lake waiting frir someone 
to lovingly repair it. On our way into Bucharest I noticed a number of new buildings and was 
told this was the new World Trade Center. We made a brief stop at the Flora, a spa, for a site 
inspection. Romania is world-renowned for its spas and this one so conveniently located near 
Bucharest does get a number of international visitors and buSiness peciple. Arriving once again at 
the Village Museum I was greeted by my lovely guide, who was so delighted to see me again. 
As the day was turning colder, we decided not to tour the museum. Instead we watched native 
craftspeople and I bought a number of presents. How awful I felt when My guide Old' the- thil-
what I had purchased was equal to two weeks salarY. But I was helping the museum out. 
My stay in Romania ended with a visit to the Madrigal Singers. This world farnous group has 
won outstanding awards all over the world. My host was the Press Minister. I cannot tell you 
how beautiful these voices were. As Paul and I agreed " they were the voices of angels". Coming 
out after the concert the snows embroiled our car, and we had to be constantly pushed. Paul 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690358 Date: 07/22/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 9 0 3 5 81ED U.S. Depariment of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690358 Date: 07/22/2021 
finally took the Metro and my wonderful driver somehOw got me back to the hotel. I found it 
hard to sleep that night. So much had happened in one week. Romania has lots of problems, but 
I felt uplifted and happy to have seen it when I did. Surviving the blustery cold was nothing in 
comparison to what many of the people must face: Some buildings, including the Chamber of 
Commerce the day we visited it had no electricity, others no _heat or too much. -There was food 
in the stalls, but most of it tube vegetables and sausage. I thank the Lord-for what I have. 
The next morning dawned all too quickly. A land rover, requisitioned by the Ministry picked up 
three of us going to the airport. The roads were either piled high with drifting snow or bare and 
icy. What a last impression. I bade farewell to Carmen realizing I had made a lovely new friend. 
Hopefully our paths will cross soon again, and I can reciprocate. The airport sported leaking 
ceilings, tight security (one can still see the sentries posted every so often outside and the 
military everywhere) and few personnel. Obviously this is not a highly used facility 
internationally like Vienna where we stopped for several hours. Our plane was late in departing, 
hindered by a frozen engine. They finally had to bring in some Tarom equipment as Delta had 
none of their own. 
Would I go back ? Yes, happily. I know I was slightly spoiled by Carmen, a driver and car and 
the appointments, but I found the country beautiful, unspoiled and waiting for outsiders to visit. 
Last year Romania had 6 million tourists. Only 13,000 were Americans. If you love old world 
charm, wide boulevards and villas, monasteries, spas and don't need every amenity, I suggest 
exploring this unique country. 
Katie Holmes 
Editor 
©1993 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690358 Date: 07/22/2021