[Page 1]
C 6 6 9 4 7 20 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694720 Date: 05/29/2019 
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
Participants: Former President Jimmy Carter 
Strobe Talbott 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DATE: October 12, 1994, 2:30 PM (telephone conversation) 
TALBOTT: I have spoken to Janet Reno, and as expected, she 
cannot give out the information you requested. You can call 
her yourself, but I'm confident that is the answer you will 
get. On the second matter, I have received confirmation that 
Alex Cedras will be paroled into the United States today for 
six months. As far as the house is concerned, Bill Swing has 
been given full authority to do what is necessary, including, 
if necessary, negotiating a lease. 
CARTER: That's very good. I appreciate that. 
TALBOTT: As for Panama, I would have been 99 percent sure that 
everything would be worked out prior to our earlier experiences 
with Endara, but after that experience, I am only about 70 
percent confident. But I think it would be best if they were 
to agree to go to E1 Salvador today, as a temporary measure, 
and we will continue to work on Panama. 
CARTER: I can't recommend that they do that. I have spoken to 
Perez Balladerez and Lewis and I have received assurances from 
them that all they need is a letter from Aristide. I trust the 
Panamanians, I don't trust the Salvadorans. 
TALBOTT: I think it would be best.of they could reave today, 
with the knowledge that we are continuing full speed_ahead on 
Panama. _ 
CARTER: I have gone around in cirCles today with the--White-
House, getting assUrances that Arfetide sent a letter-, and when 
I finally got hold of Aristide, hea-_--s-aid he had never been asked 
for a letter, just a statement. 1-guess this is just. a matter 
of mixed communication, with too many, intermediaries-,-and I am 
probably one of the excesses. Ihave ironclad assur-ances from 
the Panama that a letter from Aristide is all they need. I 
could not recommend that they go to:E1 Salvador, I would 
recommend that they not go there. was there once, it was 
worse than Beirut. 
TALBOTT: Well, we have followed up on the two things you asked 
for. 
CARTER: And I am very grateful. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06694720 Date: 05/29/2019