[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 9 0 15 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019 
-CONT-HEA444411.-_ 
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
WAFT -
Subject: The Vice President's Meeting, with Russian Prime 
Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin 
Date/Time: December 2, 1996; 1120-1205 
Place: Lisbon OSCE Conference 
Participants: U.S. • 
The Vice President 
Deputy Secretary Talbott 
Leon Fuerth 
James Collins 
Jan Lodal 
Steve Pifer 
Russia 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin 
Foreign Minister Primakov 
Mr. Petelin 
Mr. Mamedov 
Mr. Makuryan 
plus one 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
(The Vice President and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin exchanged 
pleasantries during the photo op at the beginning of the 
meeting : ) 
The Vice President: President Clinton very much appreciates the 
letter he received from President Yeltsin and responded with some 
hand-written comments. We want to work with Russia to restore 
momentum in our relationship after President Yeltsin's successful 
operation. It is time to move forward and resume progress. With 
renewed initiative, we can put the relationship on a firm and 
irreversible course of partnership and cooperation. 
I have a response frOm President Clinton to President Yeltsin. 
The President expresses his desire for an early meeting, and we 
can help prepare the ground for it. If President Yeltsin agrees, 
perhaps they could meet a few weeks after our Commission meeting. 
(The Vice President gives Yeltsin the President's letter. ) 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: That's in February. 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
6/25/2019 
77 -51777 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 2]
CO 6 6 9 9 0 15:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019 
2 
The Vice President: Yes, following up on your idea for a meeting 
February 2-4. If acceptable, we would need a few weeks after 
that meeting before the Presidents meet. You and I could clear 
away the underbrush and make their meeting more productive. 
We're the bulldozers. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: That's our destiny, to clear the 
way for others. 
The Vice President: We need to keep oljr eye on the path. We 
need to clear it in order to follow it. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: We need this period to be peaceful 
so that we can work. 
Foreign Minister Primakov: Let the Ministers clear a path for 
you. 
The Vice President: I enjoyed our telephone conversation a few 
days ago and am happy that this meeting is turning out to be a 
success. As I said in my statement, I think your personal role 
was important in this regard. We look forward to using the OSCE 
mechanisms as you suggested in your speech. We also look forward 
to working with you and other Treaty partners in adapting the CFE 
Treaty to the many changes since the end of the Cold War. 
With regard to NATO, we also believe that if has an important 
role to play. Next week, NATO Ministers will announce a summit 
no later than July that will invite the first aspirant's to begin 
accession negotiations. We also hope the summit can make 
progress on establishing a strong NATO-Russia relationship. 
Developing that relationship in parallel with enlargement, in a 
way that ensures that there is a channel for NATO-Russia 
consultations and joint/action, remains an important U.S. 
objective. The United States and NATO want to work with you to 
develop more thoroughly the relationship between Russia and NATO. 
In fact, we have demonstrated to the whole world in Bosnia how 
productive NATO-Russian relations can be. 
We know that you have several concerns about conventional and 
nuclear deployments in Central Europe. As the President notes in 
his letter to President Yeltsin, we believe that we can address 
many of your concerns. For example, and this is significant, we 
see no reason, and there is no plan or intention, to deploy 
nuclear weapons on the territory of new members. 
I also wanted to address some arms control issues. 
CO 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 9 9 0 1 5 1ED U.S. Department ofState Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019 --
CONFIDENTIAL 3 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: Fine,-but first I would like to 
make a few comments. Congratulations to you and your team for 
the wonderful election result. We had passionate feelings in 
this. We were for your success and want to congratulate you. I 
hope your new team will soon begin to work. Do you know how soon 
it will be? 
The Vice President: The President and I spoke on my way here. 
Though it is not certain, I would advise you that there will 
probably be an announcement in the next few days regarding 
replacements for Secretary ChFistopher and Secretary Perry. 
There are no final decisions yet. We are trying to see if we can 
find anyone capable of going toe-to-toe with Mr. Primakov. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: If that's the cause for the delay, 
then I might be upset! We are interested in knowing this. 
The Vice President: If there is no announcement this week, then 
it will be next week. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: As for our future work, the Gore-
Chernomyrdin Commission is becoming well-known for getting 
results. Perhaps we might agree on certain new activities. 
During our February meeting we should discuss such things. 
Regarding timing, I said the second and third of February, but we 
still have to think of our options -- the first week of February 
and the second week of February. We might get in contact later 
and try to clarify the dates. Our experts can work this. I plan 
to be in Davos January 30-February 2. 
The Vice President: The last day of Davos is February 4; you'll 
be there until the second? 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: Yes. Will .you be there, Al? 
The Vice President: I don't know. I have been invited to give a 
keynote speech, and I am very interested in the subject -- the 
impact of science and technology on the environment. But Leon 
has not yet agreed. As for the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission, it 
is a source of pride but also a source of work! We are getting 
lots of requests from other countries for commission. I've got 
Kazakstan, and you've got France. I was going to work on 
Nazarbayev about his wine industry! 
I agree our staffs should try to work out the dates. The first 
week of February is better for me, since the South Africa 
Commission is the third week of February. 
CONFIDENTIaT.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 4]
C 6 6 9 9 0 1 5 1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019 
CONFIDENTIAL 4 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: We'll work with Fuerth. It would 
be desirable to have our meeting well before the Presidents' 
meeting, so that we can make certain preparations. But it is now 
for the President to make the final decision. I'll report to 
him. 
The Vice President: And I will report to my principal as well. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: As for the OSCE, we believe the 
OSCE could be the leading organization in Europe. Looking to 
what the UN and the UN Security Council do, we think,the OSCE can 
take on other issues as well. I.think we should consider other 
issues. 
As for NATO, you know our views. We know that you are going to 
decide to have a meeting in June to reform NATO, and allegedly 
that session will also decide regarding new members. We cannot 
understand what enlargement is for, what are the reasons. 
The Vice President: Within NATO, we refer to internal adaptation 
and external adaptation. Internal adaptation refers to how NATO 
is structured and shares burdens. External adaptation has to do 
with inviting new members. 
In this regard, we will recommend that there be no nuclear 
weapons on the territory of new members. That decision has not 
yet been made by the Alliance, but that is our recommendation. 
We know this is of interest to Russia. - 
Deputy Secretary Talbott: The structural and doctrinal changes 
will underscore that .the Alliance is changing. 
The Vice President: Yes. It is adapting to the new realities. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: We do not yet know what will be 
done. We know that NATO has certain ideas on its military 
organization; we then have to speak of doctrine. Then there is 
the question of whether there will be a charter or some other 
document. It has to be a serious document with serious content. 
We need to resolve these issues. 
NATO enlargement is unacceptable to Russia. We cannot explain to 
the Russian people why NATO is enlarging. As for the non-
deployment of nuclear weapons, we need to know. We understand 
that Poland will have no say, but we need to have answers to 
these questions. Moving NATO toward Russia's borders is not 
explainable. It will be difficult to control the situation. 
The Vice President: I agree that the dialogue between the United 
States and Russia and between NATO and Russia must adopt greater 
CONFI DENT IAL
, UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 5]
C 6 6 9 9 0 15FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019 • 
CONFTnPATTIAL 5 
intensity and engage in discussion of all the details so that 
there is a full understanding. I have felt from the beginning 
that the question of parallelism was important. What I mean is 
that the NATO-Russia relationship must be deepened -- as must the 
U.S.-Russia relationship -- as enlargement moves forward. 
Who would have thought two years ago that NATO and Russia would 
join in military action in Bosnia? The deeper relationship 
between NATO and Russia made this possible.- We want a decisive 
process of dialogue and contact that answers all of the questions 
that you, President Yeltsin aO the Russian people have regarding 
changes within NATO, so that you have a full understanding of 
every change and the reasons for the change plus the opportunity 
to express your views to us and to NATO. I hope this process 
will satisfy the concerns you alluded to and that Russia will be 
able to enter into a relationship with NATO on mutually 
acceptable terms, as we did in Bosnia. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: We do not discuss parallelism, but 
the need for a chain (sequence) -- first, NATO reforms and 
understanding what that means; second, a NATO-Russia relationship 
and understanding; and third, NATO enlargement -- but in that 
sequence, not in parallel. This is December, but we only know 
about NATO enlargement. I do not think we will be able to do 
anything on this. 
The Vice President: First, the difference between parallelism 
and sequential development is a matter on which we. disagree. I 
believe that the parallel approach is the best. If we proceed 
sequentially, that could give rise to a veto in effect. An 
inability to come to mutually acceptable resolution on the NATO-
Russia relationship might appear to stop NATO enlargement. 
The more important point for me is the one raised when you asked 
why NATO should enlarge. You and I, Presidents Clinton and 
Yeltsin, have discussed this. The prospect of instability in 
Eastern or Central Europe is a cause for concern for all of 
Europe. There is a fear in these people born of their bitter 
experience of this century. There is a strong desire to belong 
to NATO. It has nothing to do with hostility toward Russia. It 
is due to a desire to achieve the peace and stability that NATO 
has had for 47 years. 
In theory, we do not exclude Russia from joining NATC. This 
strikes some as an absurdity, but not us as the purpose of NATO 
enlargement is to promote stability, peace and confidence. The 
desire of nations to achieve this stability is the reason for 
their desire to join NATO. 
CONFIDENTIAL 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 6]
CO 6 6 9 90 1 57IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019 
CONFIDENTIAL 6 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: We will not prohibit anyone from 
joining NATO. We have no right to a veto. But when we begin 
discussions, those who want to join NATO explainwhy -- they talk 
of peace and stability, 'but we in Russia understand that they see 
the threat as Russia. Poland thinks it might be threatened by 
Russia. Who do they see as a threat -- Sweden? Hungary? .The 
Poles are seeking security guarantees against someone, and we 
cannot explain this. Let us cooperate on this or be swept aside. 
The Vice President: Let us do this intensely and in parallel. 
We need to do it in a way tha.t makes clear to Russia and Europe 
that NATO is not against-Russia. The purposes of those countries 
seeking to join is not fear of Russia or a desire to array 
military force against Russia, but to establish the confidence 
and stability that comes with being part of the Alliance. 
This is a new era -- there are no enemies and no Cold War. 
During the Great Depression, President Roosevelt said that there 
was nothing to fear except fear itself. In the European context, 
the fear of instability can take on a life of its own. Of course 
Poland does not fear Hungary. But Alliance membership can give 
them stability against centrifugal forces or the tensions that 
arise when different ethnic groups live across borders. 
Participation in the Alliance would provide confidence to 
withstand such pressures. 
The process over the next six months between you and me, between 
Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin, and between Russia and NATO must 
be an intense, sincere effort to resolve problems and build 
confidence in a way that is good for Russia and Europe. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: I agree. We cannot avoid the 
issue. For the United States, there is an ideal formula. But 
for Russia and Europe, it makes us wary. Russia might understand 
you and your ideas, but the Poles see NATO as a counterbalance 
for Russia and the Warsaw Pact. For years there was a NATO-
Warsaw Pact balance, but now the Warsaw Pact is gone. NATO 
remains, and its goals and purposes are the same. You cannot 
explain this to the Russians. They have long memories, and they 
have not yet buried their Cold War memories. This will be of 
concern in Russia. 
We will work with you and NATO, and I am confident we will be 
able to find something. We must work out something. It is much 
better to have peace with Russia and a worried Poland than peace 
with Poland and a worried Russia. We are discussing this with 
the French -and Germans. They say there is no danger since they 
are in NATO but then point to the Russians as a worry. That is 
our concern. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 7]
CO 6699015FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019 
• 4 
CONFIDENTIAL 7 
The Vice President: You have made an important and powerful 
statement. The discussion of the internal adaptation of NATO 
should be seen as more far-reaching and significant than it has 
been described to date. There is an opportunity for NATO to 
define its purpose and mission in new ways, taking account of the 
end of the Cold War and the emergence of democracy in Russia. 
This internal adaptation must define NATO's purposes in ways 
informed by our dialogue as well as that between the United 
States and Russia and NATO and Russia. We have a lot of work to 
do. 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin: Thgnk you for the discussion. We 
.have much to talk about in the future. 
-- End of conversation --
IAL 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06699015 Date: 08/26/2019