[Page 1]
C O 6 6 9 813 5 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698135 Date: 07/25/2019 
TALBOTT BILATERAL WITH BARAK 
RELEASE IN 
FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
I enjoyed my half hour introductory meeting with Ehud 
Barak in Budapest. I found him engaging in an earthy, soldierly 
way. He opened by asking somewhat anxiously about the odds for 
success of the IFOR mission. He expressed incredulity -- and a 
hint of pride on our behalf -- that the Europeans wouldn't 
commit to "shed blood for peace in their own backyard" until 
America stepped in to lead. Barak made it clear Israel sees a 
direct connection between U.S. success in Bosnia and our mutual 
chances for success in the Middle East. As such, they are both 
nervous and excited about the IFOR mission: nervous, because a 
a humiliation in Bosnia would weaken our credibility with the 
Syrians and perhaps cost Clinton his reelection ("a terrible 
setback for the peace process"); excited because success in 
Bosnia could translate into a very powerful foreign policy 
position for the President in a second term. 
Barak said Israel wants to contribute to the humanitarian 
reconstruction effort in Bosnia. They also want to strengthen 
their ties more generally with European institutions like the EU 
and the OSCE, which is why he went to Budapest. 
We then turned to the NIS and I briefed him on the various 
cooperative initiatives we've been trying to nurture with Israel 
in the region: Collins will host the first round of 
U.S.-Israeli bilateral talks on the Caucasus in January; we are 
also contemplating trilateral talks with the Ukrainians; we 
currently cooperate trilaterally with Turkey on an investment 
fund for Central Asia; and, we stay,in close touch on Russian 
nuclear cooperation with Iran. Barak said Israel is also trying 
to strengthen its ties with Turkey both because Turkey sets a 
good example of secular islam for NIS and Middle Eastern 
countries and because "Syria has respect for Turkey's strength." 
Barak said he had seen Kozyrev earlier that day and hit 
him hard on Iran, warning that even the exchange of scientists 
associated with the reactor project could shorten the Iranians' 
bomb production time significantly. He said Kozyrev was 
noncommital, and asked what Grachev had said on the subject 
during his visit to Israel last week. Grachev, Barak said, 
refused to engage at all on the subject of Iran. Overall, the 
Grachev visit,went well -- they flew him over the Golan and 
discussed arms markets-extensively. Barak noted that Grachev 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS, 
4/22/2019 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698135 Date: 07/25/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 813 5 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698135 Date: 07/25/2019 
-2-
withstood significant regional criticism in making the trip to 
Israel, particulary from the Egyptians. He said he found 
Grachev more confident than Kozyrev, but still lacking 
"something" for the minister of defense of a great power. 
Chernomyrdin, on the other hand, had impressed him during their 
brief encounter at the Rabin funeral. "He didn't know the 
place, he didn't know anyone, but yet he felt confident," Barak 
said. 
I asked him how he felt about preparations for the Peres 
visit to Washington. He said he and the Prime Minister had had 
a very good strategy session with Dennis and the peace team last 
week. They were working on a tactical approach to Assad that 
ensures he sees Peres' enthusiam for kick-starting the Syria 
track not as a sign of weakness, but as a serious gesture which 
allows Assad to make a move too. 
Barak told me he personally believes the Rabin 
assassination had a profound affect on Assad. It showed him 
that the resistance to peace in Israel is real, and not just an 
Israel government "propoganda tool" to be turned on and off at 
will to manipulate the peace process. In Barak's view, Assad is 
now more aware of the seriousness of the whole problem. He 
knows that if he is too tough, the peace process could deadlock. 
Assad, Barak said, is also acutely aware of the Israeli 
and U.S. election schedules. A new government in the U.S. could 
throw back the peace process. A new Israeli government might 
not have the political capital or energy to move forward on the 
Syrian track, at the same time as it has to open permanenet 
status with the PLO and solidify the progress with Jordon. 
Syria risks being passed by. At the same time, it is already 
seeing that those Arab neighbors who have accepted the "new 
rules of the political and economic road" (eg. Israel's 
continued existance as a state) are reaping immediate benefit in 
terms of new foreign investment. Syria currently can't compete. 
On the other hand, Barak worried, Assad may be paralyzed 
by what he called the "Ceaucescu syndrome" (sp???). "You open 
the window for a fresh breeze and get blown away by the 
hurricane." Barak said Ceaucescu's grisly end had had a 
profouna affect on autocrats throughout the Middle East: 
whereas democrats can reform, fail, get deposed and eventually 
come back to power in the next government, in dictatorships, you 
get dead if you lose power. 
Barak is just not sure Assad is ready to take that risk for 
peace. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06698135 Date: 07/25/2019