[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 9 0 0 5 4 RED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690054 Date: 06/16/2021 
r • • 
RELEASE IN FULL 
ASK NOT WHAT YOU CAN DO FOR YOUR COUNTRY: 
THE WHITE HOUSE'S DOUBLE STANDARD MAY APPLY 
Can a wife serve as an unpaid advisor to her husband when he is a 
public official? Apparently the answer is yes, if the couple is 
President and Mrs. Bill Clinton (and yes, if it is House Speaker 
and Mrs. Thomas Foley), but no, if it is a candidate for a position 
in the Clinton Administration and his wife. 
Sidney Graybeal and Patricia McFate, a husband and wife who have 
worked as a team in the field of national security and arms control 
have just been denied positions for which they were judged well 
qualified because the White House Legal Council's office felt that 
there were "ethical and potentially political problems" associated 
with a situation in which a wife would serve as an advisor to her 
husband either on an arms control delegation or in Washington. Of 
course, they were told, McFate could travel with Graybeal as a 
housewife, but she could not choose to serve in an unpaid capacity 
in the field in which she presently makes her living. 
On February 4, 1993, Thomas Graham, the Acting Director of ACDA 
called Sidney N. Graybeal and informed him that the White House 
National Security Staff had asked him to obtain a Commissioner for 
the Standing Consultative Commission, the body responsible for 
implementing the ABM Treaty. Graybeal was told that the White 
House National Security Staff and Graham considered him to be the 
most qualified candidate. Graybeal was enthusiastic about 
returning to a position which he had earlier held. He replied that 
he would accept the position on the condition that his co-worker 
and wife Patricia McFate be allowed to serve as an unpaid advisor 
in Washington and on the SCC Delegation. When Graham stated that 
he saw no problem in working this out, Graybeal accepted the 
position and stated that he welcomed the opportunity to help revive 
the ABM Treaty after twelve years of neglect. ACDA sent Graybeal 
and McFate personnel and security forms which they completed and 
returned. 
Prior to this offer, the Clinton ACDA transition team had selected 
Patricia McFate as a candidate for a specific position in ACDA. 
However, given the nomination of her husband, she chose to forego 
this opportunity in order to continue working on ABM Treaty issues 
within the SCC context. A life-long Democrat, McFate looked 
forward to serving her country and her President as a volunteer: 
she had served on a voluntary basis for two years as a member of 
the University of Arkansas Strategic Council and she was an early 
supporter of the Clinton/Gore campaign. An admirer of Hillary 
Rodham Clinton, she believed that the Clintons understood that 
"choice" was a concept which extended to decisions in the 
workplace. 
What followed were numerous exchanges between Graybeal and Graham 
and between McFate and the Acting General Council of ACDA. After 
a period of time it became clear that ACDA could not or would not 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690054 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 9 0 0 5 4IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690054 Date: 06/16/2021 
r 
work out the arrangement as Graham had said. At a time when ACDA's 
existence as an agency was being called into question, its staff 
was clearly worried about "embarrassing" the Agency. 
The issue was then forwarded to the White House for resolution. 
Through the good offices of interested parties on the Hill, 
Graybeal and McFate learned that several senior officials in the 
White House did not believe that there were ethical or legal 
problems associated with the situation; indeed, it seemed identical 
with that of the Clintons. 
There seemed to be no question about the team's qualifications. 
Sidney Graybeal was a member of the delegation which negotiated the 
ABM Treaty, he headed the group which negotiated the Charter and 
Regulations for the Standing Consultative Commission, and he was 
appointed by President Nixon as the first U.S. Commissioner on the 
SCC, a position he held for four years. Graybeal received the 
President's Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service from 
President Jimmy Carter for his governmental service. He then 
worked closely with Senators Sam Nunn and A1 Gore on countering the 
Reagan Administration's attempt to undermine the ABM Treaty with 
their proposed unilateral "broad interpretation." For the past five 
years, Graybeal and McFate have been working for a company in the 
private sector; they perform analyses of a variety of national 
security and arms control issues, particularly ABM Treaty 
interpretations and compliance issues, for several branches of the 
U.S. Government. McFate has become recognized as an expert on 
these issues through her work for the Government and her extensive 
publications. 
On Friday, 26 March 1993, a Governmental official arrived at the 
offices of Graybeal and McFate to conduct routine security reviews 
in preparation for their move to ACDA. -In the middle=of-Graybeal's 
interview, Thomas Graham called and informed him that the White 
House had turned down his appointment because of "ethical and 
potentially political problems". McFate was advised that a wife 
could not serve on a delegation headed by her husband. As one 
senior White House staffer put it to Graybeal, "it is Patricia 
McFate's misfortune that she married you." On 29 March, Graybeal 
was advised that McFate could not be hired by ACDA in any capacity 
if he were hired at the same time for the SIM_ post. __Apparently 
McFate's professional credentials would be-cancelled If her-husband 
was hired in their area of work; the only solution to the problem 
was for McFate to withdraw from their field and become solely a 
non-professional wife. 
It is clear that the Clinton White House and its Legal Council are 
operating under dual standards; one for Bill and Hillary Clinton 
and a different one for Sidney Graybeal and Patricia McFate. Both 
couples are clearly qualified to serve their country; both spouses 
are willing to do so without pay. One husband and wife serve their 
country; the other couple is denied that opportunity. Apparently 
if husbands and wives want to work together as a team in the 
Administration, they had better forego marriage or get a divorce--a 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690054 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 3]
CO6690054 Fl ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690054 Date: 06/16/2021 
r 
new and surprising approach to "Family Values". There may be 
"potential political problems" in the Graybeal/McFate situation, 
but these problems pale in comparison to the problems associated 
with a White House dual standard which denied them the opportunity 
to serve their country. 
Until there is a clear U.S. policy on this issue which is uniformly 
applied throughout the Government, there will continue to be 
similar injustices. Perhaps it is time for Congress to formulate 
a new law which takes into account the realities of the nineties. 
30 March 1993 
. 
. - 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06690054 Date: 06/16/2021