[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 8 7 2 2 6 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687226 Date: 02/09/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Attachment 2 
Prolect Incentive Agreement 
In addition to as much as $2 billion in Eximbank 
financing to be provided through the proposed oil and gas framework 
agreement, there are a number of transactions which can be financed 
on the basis of limited recourse project risk. Assurance of 
repayment of credits for such projects depends upon the resources 
of the project alone, and not upon government guarantees of 
repayment. Loan documentation for one such project, the 
Chernogorskoye Joint Venture, has been recently signed; Eximbank 
also has about $1.3 billion of other projects under review. Others 
are under discussion, but no application has yet been submitted to 
Eximbank. 
In order for Eximbank to support project finance 
transactions in Russia or any other country, Eximbank requires an 
agreement with appropriate government authorities of the host 
country. The purpose of such an agreement essentially is to 
provide the necessary assurances of legal and governmental 
stability that enables lenders to assume the risk-that a project 
will be creditworthy or commercially viable. The host government 
would not be asked to guarantee payments by the borrower of any 
financing extended in connection with such project; rather, would 
be asked to take (or refrain from taking) the actions that may be 
necessary to maintain the regime of laws, decrees and regulations 
under which the creditworthiness or commercial viability of the 
project was initially determined. ._ 
These relate to such areas as hard Currendy 
convertibility; issuance and maintenance of all necessary 
approvals, authorizations, ,licenses and _quotas; _agreement, to 
refrain from direct or indirect interference, expropriation or 
Confiscation; recognition of the rights which Eximbank may_obtain 
by subrogation from the lenders it-is_guaranteeing_; undertakings 
to adopt and maintain regulations And procedures for the perfeotion 
of security interests in assets located in the host country; and 
agreements regarding the performance by entities involved in a 
project which are owned or .controlled by the host governmeht., 
Assurances should relate to actions not only by the central 
government, but also by regional and local authorities. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687226 Date: 02/09/2021