[Page 1]
C 0 6 6 8 718 4 U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021 
Vol. 1, No. 1 Quarterly of the World Federalist Association - Southeast Region Summer 1993 
FEDERALISTS HONOR TWO GLOBAL STATESMEN 
NEW WFA REGION IS LAUNCHED 
A new WFA Region was launched during the National 
Assembly at Marymount University, It was a self-starter 
from the beginning. Interesting how these things just 
"happen"! A group of representative chapter leaders in the 
Sout least, aware of the 
time and energy expended 
in the duplication of 
membership record keep-
ing, newsletter communica-
tion, etc., decided they 
could all benefit more by 
pooling their talents and 
other resources. It was 
agreed that the mutual 
goal could thus be reached 
more expeditiously. 
The group met three times 
over that week-end, The 
first tirne, like the historic 
1786 meeting in Annapolis 
on the U.S. Articles of 
Confederation, produced 
little more than the 
expressed need to meet 
again and the conviction 
that further cooperation 
would evolve. The second 
tirne, held during the 
banquet, produced only 
confusion because of 
background noise. But the 
third, held in the cafeteria after most of the crowd had left, 
resulted in the enthusiastic bonding of those committed to 
making the project work. 
Decisions reached included the following: a single quarterly 
to go to all Southeast chapters and at-large members in MD, 
DC, VA, W VA, DE, NC, SC, GA, FL; election of pro tern 
officers: Dr. John Holden, president; Robert Heppe, 
Secy/Treas.; and a group of representative councillors to serve 
until a more permanent organization can be launched, 
probably this Fall. The VA office was chosen as tentative 
eadquarters, and a series of fundraising events was discussed. 
Advantages of most of the above items were weighed along 
with responsibilities. Various thoughts on the new vcnture 
are set fonh in this, our first issue of The Southeast federalist. • 
Amb. Talbott receives award from WFA Pres- Anderson. 
Picture on easel is Norman Cousins 
"The message from the Moon is that no problem need 
any longer be considered insoluble." - Norman Cousins 
A recent reception honoring Ambassador Strobe Talbott and. 
WEA's late president, Norman Cousins, was held at the Ins 
ternational Club in Washington. Highly honored also at the 
reception was Mrs. Cousins from California. 
Talbott, a secondsgeneration world Federalist, was appointed 
by President Clinton as Ambassador-at-Large Responsible for 
Conducting Economic Aid 
for the Former Soviet 
Union. In stressing the 
importance of helping 
Russia today to remain a 
democracy, Talbott gave 
unstinting praise to 
Gorbachev for opening up 
his country to the modern 
world* 
Talbott's parents were 
World Federalists from the 
start but were unable to 
attend the founding meet-
ing in Asheville because, he 
remarked with a smile, 
young Strobe was "being 
born that week-end. ' 
However, the family dog 
was quickly named 
"Feddie. 
Other notables present 
included Stanley Platt from 
Minneapolis, initiator of 
the Global Structures 
Convocations, whose GSC 
III will take place in 
Washington Feb, 3-6, 1994; and Neal Potter, Maryland's 
Montgomery County Executive and a chaner member of the 
World Federalists, 
At the reception, the Federalists also honored donors to the 
Grenville Clark Club and the Norman Cousins Memorial 
Fund. Some of these honorees, too, are 1947 charter-member 
world Federalists. 
This historic event was coordinated by Dr. John Holden, 
president pro tem of NVFA's new Southeast Region a 
Highlights Page 
Global Statesmen . . . 1 
Launching of Region . . . 1,2 
Editorials . . . . . . . . „ . 3 
Chapter Reports . . . . . . . . 4,5 
Town Hall
Guidelines . 8 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 6 8 718 4 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021 
Page 2 THE SOUTHEAST FEDERALIST SUMMER 1993 
Congratulations to the New Region 
From the WFA President 
Dear Members of the Southeast Region: 
The news of the creation of a Southeast Regional Federation 
of WFA is, I believe, a welcome sign of vitality and purpose 
for our organization as a whole. The Charter of the U.N. 
itself recognizes the valuable contributions to the achievement 
of its overall goals of peace and justice that can be made by 
Regional organizations. Would anyone seriously argue that 
the European Community of 12 member nations has been a 
detriment to the work of the U.N.? Or would a serious case 
be made that such Regional associations of states as the 
Organization of American States (OAS), Organization for 
African Unity (OAU), or the Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN) have frustrated the overall effort to 
strengthen the U.N.? To ask the question is to suggest that 
the answer to such questions would be emphatically in the 
negative. 
Indeed I do not believe it is too much to suggest that the 
future will likely see an even further decentralization of the 
United Nations in the interests of greater efficiency as well as 
the acceptance of its mandate. 
The parallelism that is suggestive between the U.N. and WFA 
in the manner of their organizational evolution is therefore 
capable of creating a synergism that will both strengthen and 
enlarge their outreach. It cannot be gainsaid that the U.N. is 
facing both opportunity and changes in the post cold-war 
environment because of the increasing number of items that 
have been inscribed on its agenda. 
Likewise we in the WFA are confronted with both new 
challenges and opportunities for expanded influence and some 
of the perils that can beset any organization which is almost a 
half century old. In the latter category would be an inability 
to adapt to new structures that are needed to re-invigorate our 
existing membership as well as increase it. 
I wish the new Southeast Region the very best, and it is both 
my hope and expectation that we at National WFA will profit 
greatly by your enterprise and 
energy. We are bonded in a common 
effort to "seize the moment passing 
fair" of which the poet wrote to help 
build a more peaceful world, a more 
just society, and to nurture the efforts 
that must be made to undergird this 
with efforts to promote sustainable 
development in a healthy world 
environment. Global problems 
require global solutions. Never has 
the role of non-governmental 
organizations (NGO's) been more 
important in achieving these lofty 
goals. As we strengthen our own 
WFA we advance the possibilities for 
progress by this vital sector. • 
doh,rt Jrtclerion 
From the Field Director 
Dear Southeast Regional Members: 
This is to express my congratulations and warm good wishes 
on becoming a Region. In creating a level of organization 
between chapters and national, you are taking part in a 
process that is going on around the country in our movement. 
This letter is being written during a lull at the annual meeting 
of the seven-state Midwestern Region, which is upgrading its 
organization and considering hiring a part-time Regional 
director. Other staffed Regions in our movement include 
Pittsburgh, New England, Northern California, and Southern 
California. Greater New York wants to regionalize and hire a 
staff person next year or later this year. Eventually we hope 
to have a Regional office available to assist every chapter in 
the country. 
Regions have an important role to play both in encouraging 
and carrying out activities particular to their area, such as 
conferences, and in promoting and assisting national activities 
in greater detail than can be provided from national. The 
latter function may be especially necessary with two 
important new projects: the chapter partner project for 
rejuvenating and strengthening chapters, and grass roots 
activities connected with the UN 50 Campaign. 
So, welcome, Southeast Region. There's plenty of work for 
you! • 
S cott Jclogman 
"We a11 know that the U.N. can't stop the killing in Bosnia 
for the same reason it can't stop terrorism and torture, the 
slashing and burning of rain forests, or the spread of 
nuclear weapons. 'Law and Order' at the global level 
doesn't exist." 
- John A nderson 
Some of the founders of the Southeast Region: Ray Watts, David Cammack, , _L -1.- - T -L- LT-1-1-- A D..t.", 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 6 8 71 8 4 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021 
SUMMER 1993 THE SOUTHEAST FEDERALIST Page 3 
Editoria s 
Remember Our Goal 
The nations of the world seem bent on a collision course 
leading to global economic conflicts, degradation of the 
planetary environment, and an explosive growth in 
population. This situation has brought us to an 
unprecedented impasse - beyond the capacity of any court, 
even an "international criminal court," to adjudicate in the 
absence of world government. Military approaches to 
international problems have been costly on every front and, 
we hope, will soon be relegated to the history of our 
immaturity. But we cannot dismiss our anxiety over the 
rampant crimes against humanity. 
This collision course could provoke the collapse of 
civilization, or it could induce the civilized people of the 
world to demand democratic empowerment of the United 
Nations. World Federalists must lead. 
These injustices call for much more constructive U.S. 
leadership on the world scene. A White House 
pronouncement should go out to the heads of state, and over 
the airwaves to the people of the world, that there is a better 
approach to international crisis management and that logic 
demands immediate world planning. 
Ben Ferencz made this emphatic plea in PlanetHood, and we 
urge the members of the new Southeast Region to heed its 
message again and to respond with concerted action: 
"We can no longer pretend that we don't know 
what needs to be done. How long will it be until a 
president, prime minister, or secretary-general calls 
for a Conference to Reform the United Nations .. 
. and invites all nations to send delegates? Here is 
an opportunity for statesmanship and fame of the 
highest order. Let us seize this history-making 
opportunity and accept the challenge to create a 
more peaceful world." 
One evidence of cooperation on the local front is the uniting 
of chapters in the Southeast to work as a Region - not solely 
to overcome duplication of effort but primarily to hasten the 
achievement of our mutual goal of a United Nations world 
federation. If the primary aim of the latter is not 
maintained, the former will be pointless. 
The success of the new Southeast Region will depend on 
several factors: the determination and dedication of members 
in the Southeast, the financial help from them and from our 
national office, and - above all - the commitment of both to 
our primary goal of a justly governed world. - CM • 
"I truly believe that historians of the 
future will look back upon this last 
decade of the 20th century as the key 
turning point when the world 
conceived of itself for the first time as a 
truly global civilization." 
- Sen. Albert Gore, 1992 
The Birth of a Region 
This first issue of The Southeast Federalist marks a transition for 
us as a quarterly publication from that of the Virginia Chapter 
to that of the Southeast Region of the parent organization. 
We are most grateful to our loyal readers of the outgoing Old-
Dominion Federalist for their constant loyalty and for the 
many kind comments we have received over the years. We 
dare to hope that we shall continue to deserve this 
enthusiastic support for the new Regional publication. 
In "Play it Again, Sam" fashion, Uncle Sam is once again 
playing World Policeman. Once more, results are decidedly 
mixed. Once more, admiration for the United States by 
millions of people around the globe is diminished. Once 
more, we wind up killing and maiming scores of innocent 
bystanders, albeit bystanders of the criminal's same 
nationality, and once more we are accomplishing absolutely 
nothing toward bringing to justice either the criminal himself 
or his totalitarian regime. Yes once more, world peace and 
justice go begging. Once more, World Federalists must teach 
the world that this is not how it was meant to be, that justice 
with peace needs a great deal more than police actions at a 
national level. 
Why a Region? By uniting our ideas, energy and time, we can 
bring a stronger focus on our one essential goal. None of our 
members possesses unlimited amounts of any of these 
resources, and our organization must thrive on what resources 
the members are able to contribute in each category. 
One part of the Region's usefulness may lie in the idea of 
specialization, in order to develop and apply effective 
capabilities where possible, and to avoid unnecessary 
duplication of effort where possible. As an example, putting 
out a quality newsletter takes a considerable amount of time 
and energy. Fiowever, it can help chapters and members to 
interchange information and ideas more effectively. 
Similar specialized activities could be developed in other parts 
of the new Region as talents are available or can be developed. 
Activities which come to mind include a significant Media 
effort, either in production of programs or in marketing them 
to stations or networks, or both. Membership renewals, bulk 
mailings, and the like could be handled more effectively from 
the Region or the National Office. However, we must 
together find new ways of raising the necessary revenue. 
We want to hear from you. Please mail your thoughts to our 
"Town Hall" department, and tell us what you feel the 
Chapters need most and where the Region can help; also, send 
us your ideas on how you, the Chapters and individual 
members, can contribute. - FR • 
*The Southeast Federalist World Federalist Association, Southeast Region 
Pro tem Officers: 
President: John Holden . • Sec./Treas.: Robert Heppe 
Editor: C!eo Micbelsen • Publisher: Fel= Rosenthal 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 6 8 718 4 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021 
Page 4 THE SOUTHEASTFEDERALIST SUMMER 1993 
Reports from the Chapters 
"The Carolina Foothills World Federalist Association has a 
membership of 67. We have 3-4 meetings yearly with average 
attendance about 55. Four years since our founding we appear 
to have reached a plateau and future growth will be slow as 
the adult population of our county is only about 5,000. We 
have, I believe, made an impression and increased public 
perception of the need for world governance through a 
succession of excellent speakers and considerable publicity. 
"We were instrumental in starting the new chapter in 
Asheville and have made progress in getting a chapter in 
Hendersonville but have not yet reached the goal. It's a tough 
sell. Our basic product, world governance, is logically 
unbeatable but the packaging out of Washington is poor. If 
national WFA ever adopts a strong, directed, unequivocal 
program to bring about world government we can excite 
people and our growth should take off." 
- Ted Proudfoot, president of the Carolina 
Foothills World Federalist Association 
"The new officers of the Georgia Chapter will be announced 
in the next newsletter, since the election was held as the 
newsletter was going to press. 
"If you can participate in or support only one WFA program 
this year, the Chapter Partner Program will give your time 
and/or money the greatest return. It is important that you 
phone Don Kraus for details: (404) 717-1599. 
"Sam Grey and Do,n Kraus are ready, willing, and able to give 
speaking presentations to community groups. If you are a 
member of an organization or church that needs speakers, 
please call Don or Sam and help them set up a talk. They 
could also use volunteers to contact other groups to let them 
know that WFA of Georgia has speakers available to give 
presentations. Also, if you are interested in hosting a home 
meeting to bring in new members, call Don at the above 
number." - Don Kraus, president of the Georgia Chapter 
"We have had four neighborhood meetings during the past 
year, following the plan John Holden started in Washington. 
One was held in the city of Baltimore, one in Columbia, and 
two in the Dickeyville neighborhood on the west edge of 
Baltimore. Another is planned in Columbia this Fa11, and one 
also in Bel Air north of Baltimore. Several new members 
were recruited through these, leading to more networking 
with other organizations having concerns related to those of 
the World Federalist vision. 
"The summer of '93 must be devoted to a telephone project to 
contact each of the 400 households on our local mailing list, 
for one-fourth of them are probably no longer valid addresses. 
At the same time we'll inject an upbeat couple of sentences 
promoting the World Federalist vision, as well as promoting a 
Fal1 dinner-speaker event we're working on. We hope our 
nearby Washington and Virginia WFA friends will also 
attend." 
Rev. David W. Cammack, president 
of the Greater Baltimore chapter 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. 
"On May 15, during the National Assembly at Marymount 
University, the DC Metro Chapter elected these officers for 
the coming year: Bryan MacPherson, pres.; Neal Potter, hon. 
pres.; Stephen Damours, Ira Straus, Barbara Colgate, vice 
presidents; Robert Heppe, treas.; Phoebe Pfaehler, rec. sec.; 
Barbara Dryden, corresponding secretary. 
"As your new president, I would like to invite all of you to 
become actively involved in the work of WFA. One way is 
to join WFA's new Partner Program. If that does not appeal 
to you, there are a number of ways in which you can help our 
local chapter. These include (1) hosting home meetings where 
Federalists and prospective members meet in a social 
atmosphere to learn more about WFA, (2) assisting with 
mailings or telephone calls to members,.or (3) working to get 
WFA public service announcements on local TV and radio 
stations. If you would like to assist in any of these efforts, or 
if you want to do something that is not on the above list, 
please contact me at (703) 892-8663. In addition, let me know 
if you know of any organizations that would welcome a WFA 
speaker to tell them about WFA or the issues that WFA is 
interested in, such as U.N. reform, an international criminal 
court, or the need for a better system of international 
environmental protection." - Bryan MacPherson 
"For the coming year the Virginia Chapter will continue 
some programs which it has had success with in the past; 
'borrow' some ideas from successful programs put on by some 
of the other WFA chapters (both local and not-so-local); and 
explore some new ideas for increasing membership, funding, 
and educational outreach activities. 
"As an example of the first category, we intend to continue 
with the periodic staging of a World Federalist program with 
exhibits and information tables at county fairs and some of 
the local public libraries. We plan at least one fundraiser, and 
we expect to continue with home meetings to attract new 
members. 
"In the second category, we plan to develop a 'speakers 
bureau' with a specific target audience of Virginia members of 
some of the other groups that are members of the Alliance for 
Our Common Future. Also, we are looking into the 
possibility of obtaining a faculty sponsor at George Mason 
University so that we may put on a semester-long course on 
world federalism, as was done by the San Diego Chapter some 
years back. 
"In the last category, we hope to supply dedicated 'partners' 
to participate in the Partner Program debuted at the 
Marymount Assembly. In addition, we have obtained a list of 
Virginia area participants in Utne Reader 'salons,' and we are 
encouraging Chapter members to become involved in one or 
more of these, with the hope of spreading the federalist word 
at one of the regular salon sessions. 
"As a final note, the Virginia Chapter looks forward to 
working with the fledgling Southeast Region to help it get off 
to a good, strong start." 
- B. Gerard Cordelli, new preszdent of the Virginza Chapter 
F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 5]
C 0 6 6 8 718 4 U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021 
SUMMER 1993 THE SOUTHEAST FEDERALIST Page 5 
Don Kraus and Neal Potter at the Marymout banquet 
Jo n with us as we work to abolish the war system. Join 
us in pkdging our efforts to substitute a system of 
peace, in which peace is maintained by an effective 
world authority. Join us in advocating a system in 
which the genius of humanity is freed to promote 
physical betterment, spiritual ennoblement, and 
cultural advancement. ... Join us in advocating a 
Governrnent for Humanity. 
Alan Chatriblus, early World Federalist 
WFA Goes Online 
WFA has established two conferences on PeaceNet, a 
computer network for social justice and human rights issues 
operated by the Institute for Global Communications (IGC). 
PeaceNet has up to 10,000 people around the world in several 
hundred conferences. 
C)ur main public conference is called wfa.unreform, and it 
includes information about WFA, testimony from the U.S. 
Commission on Improving the Effectiveness of the United 
Nations, and other material. Anyone may post a message in 
wfa.unreform. 
We also- have a private, members-only conference called 
wfahnembers. The purpose of this conference is to facilitate 
information between memhers, Chapters and Regions. 
PeaceNet is a subscription service charging $10/month plus 
$5410/hour in connect time. There are other price options. 
You can sign up online with a credit card. To connect to 
PeaceNet, set your rnodem to 2400 baud, N-8-1 (NULL 
parity, 8 bit, 1 stop bit.) Then dial 1 800 777 9454. At the 
"login" prompt type "help" and you'll receive full 
information. Or write: Institute for Global Communications, 
15 De Boom Street, San Francisco, CA 94107. For more 
information, contact Jeff Epstein, WFA Virginia Chapter, 
5622 Columbia Pike, Suite 203, Falls Church, VA 22041-2718. 
■ 
Our Time Is Now 
An Appeal by Don Kraus, Adanta 
We live in interesting times. With the breakdown of the Iron 
Curtain, we have for the first time in decades a reasonable 
chance of achieving our goal within the foreseeable future. 
But our window of opportunity is limited. 
Vice President Gore uses an analogy about lily pads when he 
talks about population growth: A pond starts out with one 
lily pad, Each day the nurnber of lily pad.s on the pond 
doubles. The pond is cornpletel r covered with lily pads in 30 
days. On what day is the ponc covered only half way? The 
answer is: on the 29th day. We live sometime during the 29th 
day. If we wait until day 30 to create our World Federation, 
it might be too late. The combined pressures of population 
growth, environmental impact, nuclear proliferation, ethnic 
wars, and the other global problems that we face could very 
well take the ability to make sane decisions about the future 
out of our hands. 
But we still have time. We can act now. If you believe that 
the creation of a United Nations World Federation is the 
answer to the global problems we face today, then you need 
to get involved. Being a World Federalist means rnore than 
just paying your $25 dues each year; it means giving in 
whatever way you can, because no one else will do it. It 
means giving your time, your money, getting your friends 
and your farnilies involved. It means not being afraid to 
say "I AM A WORLD FEDERALIST." 
World leaders will not allow the creation of a UN World 
Federation unless they are given a strong political mandate b 
a grassroots movement. Many of you are currently involve , 
but our nurnbers are still too few [and too silent]. Call our 
local Chapter Partners Program (404-717-1559), or our 
Southeast Region (703-379-1182), and say "I want to help." 
Never before in the history of our world can the efforts of 
such a small group of people have the degree of impact on 
the future, as we can today. We need you. The world 
needs you. The future needs you. CALL TODAY! • 
Fern and Lowell Ashby, Ellen Cousins, 
and Neal Potter at the Talbott reception 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 6]
C 0 6 6 8 718 4 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021 
Page 6 THE SOUTHEAST FEDERALIST SUMMER 1993 
Town HAI 
Ve are now moving into a chapter of Inman history in 
which our choice is going to be . between one world 
and no world. ... I beliew in the imminence of one 
worict human is going to be a unity again in ail its 
aspects and activities , „ , sectarianism subordinated to 
ecumenicalism „ , , nationalism to world, government. 
Arnold Toynbee 
"The formation of the Southeast Region of the World 
Federalist Association is an inner structural growth for better 
communication and coordination of WFA affairs. Southeast 
Regional also gives expanded identity, visibility, and 
promotion of World Federalist governance. SE Regional can 
promote better coordinated local and national projects. As an 
extension of WFA educational goals SE Regional conceivably 
could become part of the structure for political action 
influence in touching grassroots America. WFA's top-down 
emphasis might best be reoriented to a bottom-up approach." 
- Arnold O.D. Peterson, Ph.D, Camp Springs, MD 
"As you know, our primary goal is to restructure the UN by 
1995, its 50th Anniversary. To do this we must do the 
following: 
"1. Increase our active membership by 50%. Ask your friends 
and family and their friends and families to join us. 
"2. Identify members and non-members, as well as 
foundations and philanthropists who can contribute 
financially on a regular basis. We can do this individually or 
we can join in the Partner Program directed by Chris Darling. 
"3. Find out more about how our Senators and Congressmen 
feel about World Government and what we can do to 
encourage them to move in our direction. 
"4. Organize home meetings for members and non-members. 
Show the 10-minute John Anderson VCR tape; discuss our 
objectives and how they can be achieved. 
"5. Write letters to the President, Senators, Congressmen, 
state and local officials, newspapers. Get time on TV and 
radio to tell about WFA aims and programs. 
"6. Volunteer to help strenvhen our Chapter, our Region, 
and our National Organization. All of us have knowledge 
and talents to share. 
"7. Attend or send suggestions to the Regional Planning 
Meeting on Sunday; Julr 25, 4 to 6 pm at the Virginia WFA 
chapter office: 5622 Co umbia Pike, Suite 203, Falls Church, 
VA 22041-2718." 
- John B. Holden, DC Regional president pro tem 
"If men  were angels, no government  Would be 
necessary." -James Madison 
"The creation of a WFA Southeast Region is one of a series of 
steps that we need to take to cultivate World Federalism in 
this part of our country. This will offer many advantages. 
The first and most obvious is this newsletter. A Regional 
newsletter will help young chapters, hke ours in Atlanta, by 
letting us know what events and activities other, more 
experienced chapters are promoting. We might not be able to 
drive to the Washington area to participate in them, but we 
can try to duplicate them here. Sometimes it's good to 'keep 
up with the Joneses.' 
"Many areas in the Southeast do not have. functioning 
chapters that can offer their members newsletters. It is 
difficult to be a World Federalist in a vacuum, and the 
quarterly National newsletters dO not provide enough support 
for many people to feel that they are part of a cohesive 
movement. Think of how many members we may have lost 
because we do not regularly communicate with them. This 
will become especially important as we begin to create 
Partner groups in towns that have no chapters. 
"Additionally, a single Regional newsletter is more cost-
effective in terms of printing, distribution, and labor, than 
multiple chapter newsletters. This will allow us to use more 
of our limited resources in areas such as lobbying, media 
outreach, fundraising, education, and constituency building. 
"Another area where we could benefit from a. Region is a 
Regional office and full-time staff. The Southeast needs a full-
time person who can provide us with consistency of purpose. 
This person could help establish new chapters, partner groups, 
and student groups and also participate in media and 
community outreach. By combining our resources and taking 
advantage of grants that other Regions currently receive from 
National to help staff their offices,we should be able to afford 
it. 
"I'm not an expert on the history of our movement, but when 
I think of what significant World Federalist , events have 
occurred in the Southeast, outside of the Capital area, the.only 
thing that comes to mind is the creation of the United World 
Federalists in Asheville in 1947. That was too long ago. It is 
time to put the rest of Southeast back on the World Federalist 
map again. I believe the creation of a dynamic Southeast 
Region will move us in the right direction. I'm very excited 
about this new beginning for us. I hope you are too." 
- Don Kraus, A tlanta, GA 
"For me, the Southeast Region is a cautious but necessary 
experiment. All our chapters are struggling, and the hope is 
that by pooling forces we can somehow be more effective. 
We need to share experiences to see if there are joint lessons 
to be learned. I get the feeling that most WFA chapters are 
weak, but I don't really know what has been happening. This 
is why I think inter-chapter communication is so important. 
"Let's find out what brings in new members and do more of 
it, and decide what doesn't work as well and do less of that. I 
don't want to do any more big events until we have some 
reason to believe they will work for us." 
- Jeffrey H. Epstein, Alexandria, VA 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 7]
C 0 6 6 8 718 4 U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021 
SUMMER 1993 THE SOUTHEAST FEDERALIST Page 7 
Town Hall, cont. 
"I'rn still ambivalent concerning a SE Region. I'm not sure 
the cost/benefit ratio will be positive. I'd guess that running a 
Region will require $40-50,000 per year for office rent, 
director's salary, supplies and travel. Will the Region receive 
equivalent benefit? I don't know although I'm favorably 
impressed with what I know of the activities of the New 
England and Northern California Regions. John Holden's 
recent memorandum indicates that approximately 10% of the 
total WFA rnembership is in the proposed Region so it 
probably warrants a Regional organization if any area does." 
- Ted Proudfocd, Lynn, NC 
eder eat anal 
0 
1 0 1 ve 
a onale ;We 
rlevoted her remar 
/ilea C(114Jei o/ peace, caa a 
prolection 
Js'a rate 
1;er rauther a 
fan, Len a e 
1/1,0_.4 Mdro „ 
"For over a year through conversations with John Holden, 
former president of the Washington Metro chapter, I've 
become persuaded that a Regional Center for World 
Federalists living within a reasonable radius of Washington 
would be valuable. If it is also valuable to those as far south as 
Georgia, I'rn delighted. However, those within about a 
hundred-mile radius of Washington are all in commuting 
distance for lending mutual support, in attending portant 
events sponsored by individual chapters, and in s aring news 
useful to a wider readership. 
"Rather than each chapter paying the annual non.profit 
rnailing fee, we can jointly pay a single fee and use the central 
office (tentatively at Bailey's Crossroads in Falls Church, VA) 
as our base address. As money comes to perrnit, beneficial 
would be a part-time secretary to coordinate mailings and 
telephoning, and to promote an increasing number of 
neighborhood-size enclaves who could rneet at regular times 
(once a quarter?) to discuss World Federalist perspectives on 
current events and to plan activity to spread our membership 
and influence government officials. The world needs the 
WFA vision made a reality, which will be delayed until a 
significant number of citizens think in this direction. A 
Regional office should help." 
- David Cammack, Baltimore, MD 
Southeast It.egion nzemhers Dr, Frank Bourne, Barbara Colgate, 
Duncan Phillips, Evelyn Falkowski at the Talbott reception 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687184 Date: 02/09/2021