[Page 1]
CO6687 78 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687178 Date: 02/09/2021 
DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS 
We propose: 
RELEASE IN FULL 
19. the strengthening of the United Nations role in monitoring how 
countries live up to their commitments to conventions and declara-
' lions concerning human rights and democracy, recognizing that 
dernocracy can develop only through popular internal will; 
20. the strengthening of independent international institutions that of-
fer to monitor countries' observance of democratic rules and prin-
ciples, in particular at time of elections, respecting the constitu-
tional ordcr of each country. 
• GLOBAL GOVERNANCE 
,We propose: 
21. that the United Nations takes on a broadened mandate at the Secur-
ity Council level, following the wide!' understanding of security 
which has developed, and that its composition and the use of the 
veto be reviewed; 
22. that the Secretary-General be given a stronger position and, the 
means to exercise authority, and that the method of appointment of 
the Secretary-General and of higher-level staff he revicwed; 
23. that the system-wide responsibilities and authority of the Secretary-
General concerning interagency coordination and cooperation 
should be firmly estahlished; 
24. that the financing system of the United Nations be reviewed, and 
that countries who do not adhere to the financial rules he deprived 
of the right to vote; 
25. that the activities of the United Nations in the economic and social 
fields be strengthened and rationalized; 
26. that the International Monetary Fund and the Workl Bank he co• 
ordinated, athong themselves and with the United Nations system 
and GA11', with the aim of a cicarcr division of kibour, better har-
mony and full universality in their work; 
27. that a World Summit on Global Governance he called, similar to 
the meetings in San Francisco and at Bretton Woods in the Nil's; 
28. as a matter of priority, the establishment of an independent Intern-
tional Commission on Global Governance. 
PARTICIPANTS IN THE STOCKHOLM INITIATIVE 
Ali Alatas 
Indonesia 
Minister for Foreign Affairs; previously Pcrmancnt Representative to the 
Unitcd Nations. 
Patricio Aylwin Agar' 
Chile 
Presidcnt. 
Benazir Bhutto 
Pakistan 
Chairman of the Pakistan People's Party; former Primc Minister. 
Willy Brandt 
Federal Republic of Germany 
Former Chancellor of the Fcdcral Republic of Germany; President of the So-
cialist International; Flonorary Chairman of thc Social Democratic Party; 
Chairman of the North-South Commission. 
Gro I lariat Brundtland 
Norway 
Prime Minister;•Chairman of the Norwcgian Labour Party; Member of the 
Palme Commission, Chairman of the World Commission on Environment 
and Development. 
Manuel Camacho Solis 
Mexico . 
I lead of the Federal District of Mexico. 
Fernando 1 lenrique Cardoso 
Brazil 
Scnator. Partido Socialdemocrata do Brasil. 
Ingvar Carlsson 
Sweden 
Prime Ministcr; Chairman of, the Swedish Social Democratic Party; Chairman 
of the Working Group. 
Jimmy Carter' 
United States 
Former President. 
Bernard Chidzcro 
Zimbabwe 
Senior Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development; former 
Chairman of the Development Committee of the World Bank and the IMF; 
, former Dcputy Sccretary General, UNCTAD;member of the Brundtland 
Commission, 
Reinaldo Figueredo Planchart 
Vcnczuela 
Former Minister for Foreign Affairs, 
Bronislaw Gvemek 
Poland 
Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee of the Sejm; Professor of His-
tory; in the 1980's adviser in the Solidarity movement. 
^ 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687178 Date: 02/09/2021

[Page 2]
CO668717 8-- UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687178 Date: 02/09/2021 
Abdlatif Al-Hamad 
Kuwait 
Director-General, Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development; former 
Minister of Finance; member of the Brandt and South Commissions. 
Mahbub ul Haq 
Pakistan 
Special Adviser, United Nations Development Programme; Minister of 
Finance and Planning 1982-88. 
Vaclav liavel* 
Czcch and Slovak Fcdcral Republic 
President. 
Edward Heath 
Great Britain 
Member of Parliament, House of Commons; Prime Minister 1970-74; mem-
ber of the Brandt Commission, 
Enrique Iglesias 
Uruguay 
President, Inter-American Development Bank; Foreign Minister 1985-88; 
Executive Secretary UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean 1972-85; member of the South Commission. 
Hong-Koo Lce 
Republic of Korea 
Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to the United Kingdom. 
, Stephen Lewis 
Canada 
Fomer Ambassador to the United Nations. 
Michael Manley' 
Jamaica 
Prime Minister 
Vladlen Martynov 
Soviet Union 
Director, USSR Academy of Sciences, Institute of World Economy and Inter-
national Relations. 
Thabo Mbeki 
South Africa 
Director of International Affairs and member of the Executive Committee of 
the African National Congress (ANC), 
Robert McNamara' 
United States 
Member of the Board, World Resources Institute, Former President of the 
World Bank. 
Bradford Morse 
United States 
Administrator of UNDP 1976-86. 
Julius Nyerere 
Tanzania 
Former President of the United Republic of Tanzania; Chairman of the South 
Commission. 
Bab6 Ndiaye 
Senegal I I ,, 
Ifiriesident af the Akitan Development Bank, 
Sabiiktpkita' 
J'apan!'' ,
' 
:1 
Former Folreigh liehnister (rePtiesented in iStdckholm by Milsuru Taniuchi). 
Jan Prank " ' 
The Netherlands 
Minister for Development Cooperation; Deputy Secretary General 
UNCTAD 1980-85; ex officio member of thc Brandt Commission, member 
of the Working Group, 
Shridath Ramphal 
Guyana 
Commonwealth Secretary General 1975-90; Ministei' of Foreign Affairs 
1972-75; member of the Brandt, Palme, Brundtland and South Commis-
sions, member of the Working Group. 
Nafis Sadik 
Pakistan 
Executive Director, United Nations Population Fund. 
Salirn Salim 
Thnzania 
Secretary-General, Organization of African Unity; former Prime Minister of 
the United Republic of Tanzania; meinbCr of ihe Palme Commission. 
A rj un Sengupt a 
lndia 
Ambassador of India to Belgiurn, Luxembourg and the European Economic 
Community; former special adviser to the Managing Director of the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund. 
Eduard Shevardnadze" 
Soviet Union 
Former Foreign Minister, 
Kalcvi Sorsa 
Finland 
Member of lhc Board of Management of thc Bank of Finland; former Prime 
Minister. 
Maurice Strong 
Canada 
Secretary General, United Nations Conference on Environment and Devel-
opment; former Under-Secretary General of the United Nations; Secretary 
General, Unitcd Nations Confercncc on the Human Environment 1970-72; 
member of the Brundtland Commission. 
Brian Urquhart' 
Great Britain 
The Ford Foundation. 
) 
'Could not attend, but has agreed to support the paper. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06687178 Date: 02/09/2021