[Page 1]
CO 67 02 7 6 2:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
tTeitE-T-
lgORANDMOFL RSV ATIONE 
Talbott-Chirac Meeting in Paris 
PARTICIPANTS: France
DATE/TIME/PLACE: 
President Jacques Chirac 
Jean-David Levitte, 
Diplomatic Counselor to 
the President 
Francois Bujon de 1'Estang 
Ambassador to the U.S. 
United States 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
Strobe Talbott, 
Deputy Secretary of State 
Pamela Harriman, 
Ambassador to France 
Alexander Vershbow, Senior 
Director for Europe, NSC 
January 14, 1997, 3:00-4:15 p.m., tlysée Palace 
* * * * 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: Welcome. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: Thank you for giving us time for this meeting. Bill Clinton 
-sends his regards. He cherishes his personal relationship with you. We are working this 
week on the future of the Alliance and the prospects for a cooperative relationship with 
Russia. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: That's a real problem. I send my best wishes to Bill Clinton and 
also to Hillary — I love Hillary — wish them all the best. I'd like to hear the problems as you 
see them. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: Let me encapsulate our approach and our main concerns. 
The first six months of this year will be the moment of truth for the Alliance and for our 
larger cause — making sure that the Cold War continues to recede into history, and using the 
opportunity history has given us to move to a truly undivided and integrated Europe , a 
subject on which you have spoken so eloquently. Let me make two points: 
First, the Summit in Madrid is a deadline against which we and our fiiends in Moscow are 
operating. It is essential that our partners in Moscow understand that the Alliance's 
leadership is of one mind and one conviction, that we are firm on the need to move forward 
with the Summit and NATO enlargement. Any other signal would make the Russians feel 
that, perhaps, NATO enlargement can be stopped if they refuse to engage with us in a 
discussion of the terms of a cooperative relationship between NATO and Russia. 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS, 
4/17/2019 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 7 0 2 7 6 2 31FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
2 
Second, at the same time, we attach the highest importance to reaching a modus vivendi with 
Russia. We are working closely with your colleagues and other key allies on a solution. I 
was just in London and Brussels, and will be going on the Bonn. I met with the NAC and 
Secretary General Solana. They have developed a promising set of ideas regarding the 
substance of an understanding and perhaps new arrangements between NATO and Russia. 
To bring this to fruition, we could use as these understandings as the centerpiece of a summit 
between NATO leaders and Yeltsin before the Madrid Summit. We are thinking notionally 
of late May, around the time of the proposed dates for the U.S.-EU Summit and the 
commemorations of the 50th anniversary of the Marshall Plan. 
That is the calendar. Regarding the substance, werare concentrating our efforts in several 
areas: a NATO-Russia Charter; finding ways to use CFE modernization to address legitimate 
Russian concerns regarding the military dimension of NATO enlargement; and a NATO-
Russia consultative mechanism -- a new body for bringing Russia together with the members 
of NATO to broaden and deepen cooperation, possibly developing toward certain limited, 
carefully defmed areas of joint decision and joint action down the road. 
That is our agenda. President Clinton values your wisdom, and he has asked us to explain 
our position and report back your views. Before Leon Fuerth, the Vice President's National 
Security Adviser, and I go to Moscow next week, we wanted to obtain the most authoritative 
impression of how key Allied leaders view these problems. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: The French position is quite specific on all these issues, given that 
we are not in NATO's integrated military command. There are three crucial problems: 
NATO reform, NATO enlargement and NATO-Russia relations. The French position is as 
follows: 
I have said that I am ready to rejoin the integrated military structure under certain conditions. 
I would like you to understand that this is a political gesture that is significant but dangerous 
for me in political terms, since we have legislative elections in little over a year. I already 
have to defend the European monetary union. If, on top of that, I have to say that I have 
renounced an ancient tradition of French independence, it won't be easy for me. This is a 
secondary consideration, however. I wasn't elected to follow public opinion, but to lead it. 
But it is a real issue. 
Second, on this point, France is not the demandeur. That is why we don't want to create 
differences between the United States and France or between France and NATO. We are not 
asking for anything. It is easy to understand the positions of other countries involved. We 
see this more as a friendly discussion rather than a confrontation. Why do I want NATO 
reform? Europe is becoming increasingly consolidated. We will have the introduction of a 
single currency. We are working toward the establishment of a common foreign and security 
policy. The EU will have 25 members within the next 10-15 years. It is clear that the 
Europeans should also have their own defense identity. I recognize that the United States 
lfeR7ET--
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 7 0 2 7 6 2 F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
3 
has, to a certain extent, withdrawn from part of Europe. We would like the current level of 
U.S. presence to remain, but this doesn't contradict the need for a European defense identity. 
For us, NATO reform requires, first and foremost, a visible presence of Europe in the defense 
structure and the possibility that, if there is a crisis that does not concern the United States, 
we can utilize the resources of the Alliance to solve it. Discussions have been underway for 
some time. We have accepted that the two strategic commands will remain American. 
Discussions seem to have reached a deadlock on the Southern Command. Things have been 
oversimplified, and there have been unhelpful press articles. I believe we should continue 
the discussions together in order to find a solution. What I want is something that involves a 
visible presence for a European defense identity. Again, this should not be a bone of 
contention between France and the United States. We should be able to avoid this, unless we 
proceed in an awkward Manner. Either we reach and agreement or we don't. If we don't, it 
will not be a problem for France. We will not go around saying that the United States wasn't 
nice -- the United States is entitled to its own views; we respect that, and expect to get respect 
for French views as well. 
The other two issues are more substantive -- NATO enlargement and NATO-Russia 
relations. This problem has been poorly handled because the process started running during 
the U.S. election campaign. This gave rise to misunderstandings. I have spoken with Bi11 
Clinton about this several times. I also discussed it with the Vice President at Lisbon. My 
conviction is that the United States does not take full account of Russian sensitivities. Vice 
President Gore said that you have seen polls conducted in Russia and that these showed that 
the Russians are not really interested in the problem of NATO enlargement. I said that, in 
Russia, there is no system that permits us to do reliable polls and that the Vice President 
could be mistaken. My conviction is that the Russian people are profoundly hostile to NATO 
enlargement. It reflects a fear of encirclement — a traditional fear of the Russians — as well 
as a fear of a humiliation that is being imposed on them. The problem is not what's in the 
head of Yeltsin or Chernomyrdin — if that were all it is, it wouldn't be so serious — but what 
is in the Russian psyche. If one imposes NATO enlargement on the Russians, the Yeltsin 
regime will not be able to resist the public reaction and will not remain in power for very 
long. 
Let me tell you a story. I visited a converted military factory near Sverdlovsk. The manager 
had set his sights on doing something with the factory and had switched from defense to 
civilian production. The part of the plant devoted to civilian production, however, was very 
small. When I asked to see the rest of the plant, it was empty. I asked the boss whether he 
planned to do something with it and he said that, given the possibility of NATO enlargement, 
he might have to convert back to defense production and so he needed tò be ready. 
So I think there is a fundamental lack of understanding between Russia and the United States 
based on misunderstandings, but we can probably find a way around them. You mentioned a 
NATO-Russia Charter, for example. I believe we can find a solution. But if we want to 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 4]
CO 67 027 6 2=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
-steRE-T--
achieve something positive in Madrid, we need to find an agreement with Moscow, even 
before the proposed meeting in May that you mentioned. I believe we need to move even 
more rapidly to have a meeting between Boris Yeltsin, Bill Clinton, me, Helmut Kohl and 
John Major. A meeting with me and Helmut Kohl is needed because Russia knows that 
France and Germany understand the situation better than the others. It could help make the 
entire event easier for the Russians to accept. 
Naturally, as you say, we can impose things on the Russians if necessary. That is true, today 
they are weak and disorganized. But you shouldn't underestimate the consequences. Do not 
forget that it is we Europeans who are Russia's neighbors and who are most concerned about 
the consequences. Russia's history is one of major pushes; you should not blind yourselves 
to the possibility that this could lead to a resurgence of deep-rooted Russian nationalism. 
Six months ago I met a delegation of 40 Russian old women -- babushki who. were on a 
tour of France. It was the first time they had left Russia. I had a chance to speak with them 
for more than an hour. None of them spoke about their standard of living,,the mafia, or their 
sense of insecurity. They all said that "we voted for Boris Yeltsin, but will not do it again 
because he won't defend us...we're going to be surrounded. What will Yeltsin do when 
American nuclear weapons start falling on Moscow and St. Petersburg?" That is what they 
said. I tried to say that they had an overly negative vision, but Russians can be very stubborn 
(as Ambassador Bujon will attest). Therefore, it is indispensable to rapidly engage in a real 
discussion with Yeltsin and Chernomyrdin. We need to find a way to present to Russia a 
position that will be convincing. It will be harder than you imagine. 
One last point on NATO enlargement itself. Naturally, I am in favor — with the caveat that it 
not be imposed on the Russians. On NATO enlargement, we have the same point of view 
with one exception: We think it would be unjust and dangerous not to include Romania in 
the first round. We are actually seeing a positive process toward peace in that region. There 
has been the signature of historic agreements between Hungary and Romania and between 
Hungary and Slovakia, which we hope will eliminate ethnic tensions. There is no way we 
can accept Hungary without accepting Romania. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: I am very grateful to you for speaking so candidly. I will be 
equally candid in replying on several points. Then I will put to you a very blunt question. 
First, on the issue of NATO reform or adaptation. We totally have welcomed your personal 
leadership and the fact that France is contemplating a retum to full participation in the 
Alliance. I have always regarded it as an anomaly, an aberration, that France is not a full 
participant. I thank you in particular because France is considering full participation at a 
historic moment - at the end of the Cold War, when we can think of integration on a larger 
scale. Therefore you should be encouraged, thanked and supported. I am aware of the 
biggest sticking point, the Southern Command. Having discussed this with our senior 
officials, including our defense officials, I can say that there is good will on our side and full 
confidence that our best experts are .grappling with the problem. We can discuss this with 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 5]
C 0 67 0 2 7 6 2 ;1F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
SECRET 5 
Jean-David [Levitte, in a follow-on meeting scheduled for later in the afternoon]. France is a 
nation of great influence and grandeur. When the United States and France work together, 
we can achieve a synergy in which the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. I will 
report that you have underscored your concern about the command issue. 
On NATO enlargement, I have listened carefully to what you and your ministers have said, 
as well as what you said on your visit to Poland. On your advocacy or Romania, let me just 
say that when I was last in Paris, I had the opportunity to speak with your colleagues about 
Romania's candidacy. Our mind is open. I used to live in Central Europe as a journalist. I 
visited Romania to interview Ceausescu on a number of occasions and so I know how far that 
country has come. It has come even farther since the recent elections. However, there are a 
number of questions that will need to be answered beyond the internal situation. Let's just 
leave it that I got your message about including Romania in the first tranche. 
I would like to concentrate on the hardest question, the NATO-Russia relationship. I was at 
the Vice President's meeting with you in Lisbon (as was Mr. Vershbow). It would not be an 
appropriate use of your time to argue too much about Russian public opinion -- I will do that 
with Jean-David. But let me say that I have spent much of my life studying Russia., I have 
made regular visits there for the past 25 years. Our perception of Russian public opinion, and 
of which segments are most passionate about NATO enlargement, is based on objective data. 
There is, in fact, quite a bit of reliable polling in Russia, and I would politely suggest that you 
should not take your babushki as the final authority on what the man and woman in the street 
are thinking and are worried about. 
But the real issue is what we do over the next six months. Here we have one point of 
agreement, one on which we need to talk further, and one on which we could have — I stress, 
could hive — the most profound disagreement between France and the United States. The 
point of agreement is that we need to do everything in our power to define a workable answer 
regarding the NATO-Russia relationship, and to do so. soon. That is the reason for my visit 
to Europe this week. We are working closely with your colleagues, and we attach the highest 
priority to this. We are also working with key allies (France, Germany and the UK) and also 
with Solana — because he is a smart man with a major intellectual and political contibution 
to make, and also because he is Secretary General of the Alliance -- to find a package that 
can square the circle. On the details of what we're thinking about, I will follow up with Jean-
David, but I don't think there is much argument between us. 
Where we may have a difference, one that is manageable, is on your idea of a meeting of the 
leaders of the Big Four plus Yeltsin to solve the problem. We will think hard about this idea. 
It has both advantages and disadvantages. The biggest disadvantage is the fact that the other 
twelve members of NATO would be looking through the keyhole wondering how what is 
happening in a room among the Big Four will affect their security. In this regard, it is no 
accident that I went to Brussels this morning to brief the NAC on our thinking and our 
intentions. 
SECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 6]
C 0 6 7 0 2 7 6 21ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
SECRET 6 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: It is just a proposal to be discussed. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: And we'll certainly discuss it, but I want you to know, quite 
straightforwardly, that we have real reservations about any format that ostentatiously 
excludes large numbers of Allies from what will, by definition, be a decisive meeting. But 
let's keep talking about it. 
The third issue is one on which we need to spend a few minutes. I will try to express my 
concern by singling out one formulation in particular that you used. You said that the 
President of France is in favor of NATO enlargement with one caveat: that it not be imposed 
on Russia. I react to that statement with caution and concem. That statement implies that, if 
despite our best efforts, we are unable to develop a modus vivendi with Moscow, then we 
would dare not -- and should not -- go forward with NATO enlargement. My blunt question 
to you is: Am I hearing you correctly? What would you do if we tried hard but failed, and 
we were faced with the question of going ahead with the Madrid summit absent a deal of 
some kind with Moscow ahead of Madrid? After I hear your answer, I'll tell you what I am 
quite sure President Clinton's answer would be. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: It is my conviction that; if we try very hard and make use of all of 
our collective intelligence, there is no chance that we will fail. I can't imagine failure. If we 
failed, it would raise questions in France as to whether we were back to square one. We will 
not fail ifwe approach the issue with finesse. So failure is unthinkable. 
You say that a meeting of the five has its problems. I recognize that. Kohl and I have a 
permanent problem with the nervousness of the smaller European countries. We grapple 
with it every day and are used to it. We are building Europe together. Before every 
European Council meeting, we send a Franco-German letter to the other members — it is the 
only way to make things worlc, but it irritates the others. In the final analysis, they are all 
happy that we proceed in this way, providing the energy needed to make progress. I am fully 
aware of the disadvantages of a five-power meeting for the other allies. But I don't think an 
agreement can be reached between the United States and Russia alone. Russia's leaders are 
becoming increasingly nervous. I am struck by the fact that they have become more and 
more opposed to NATO enlargement over the past six months. Therefore, there are more 
advantages than disadvantages to a five-power meeting — especially with France and 
Germany included, since they are more attentive to the Russian point of view. I am not 100 
percent sure of this, but I have a feeling I'm right. 
This issue is important enough that we need to give it a try. Were we not to try, at Madrid 
we would be forced either to impose enlargement on Russia, with all the dangers that would 
entail, or have a major conflict within the Alliance. If there were some fundamental reason 
why the Russians were opposed to NATO enlargement, we would have to confront some 
serious questions. But surely mostof the problem is based on misunderstandings. We don't 
SECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 7]
C 0 6 7 0 2 7 6 2 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
7 
need to argue about the state of Russian public opinion. The Russians are mistaken about the 
consequences of NATO enlargement, and that is one of the pieces of the puzzle that we have 
to change. We need to take the time to explain things to them politely. Having a five-power 
meeting is a political choice. I can understand why you might not waht to do it. But if you 
agree, we should do it as soon as possible so that we can initiate a process of discussion and 
negotiation. In short, as I say, we need to use finesse. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: On the need to move quickly, there is no disagreement. 
Thank you for the additional considerations regarding a four-plus-one meeting. Let me 
return to the question I posed, since I want to be sure of your answer. I'm pleased that you 
are as optimistic as you are that we will succeed at the end of the day in negotiating with 
Russia and achieving a NATO-Russia understanding. In my heart of hearts, I agree with you. 
But it is not unthinkable that we could fail. It is actually quite thinkable. We must think 
about that possibility together and be prepared to cope with it. Here is the reason why: the 
Russian side is all screwed up. I don't say that disrespectfi.illy or to be patronizing. They 
have gone through one of the greatest traumas in history, with more sudden change in their 
intemal order, extemal relations and ideology, and in their very defmition of statehood, than 
any country which has not lost a major war. We need to be understanding of their condition. 
But it is possible that they will not get their act together by July. We're thinking about what 
we would do in that situation: faced with the prospect of Madrid but no NATO-Russia deal, 
and what signal we send about that all-too-imaginable possibility. President Clinton's 
answer, I am quite sure, is that, even if we are unable to work out a modus vivendi with the 
Russians, we must go ahead with the Madrid summit and issue invitations to the first three, 
four or five countries. The process must go forward on schedule. The rationale is that the 
alternative is unacceptable — I'm tempted to say unthinkable: if we were to allow the 
Russians' discontent, or their inability to come to terms, to determine whether we go ahead 
with NATO enlargement, then enlargement will stop in its tracks and never go forward. If 
we make it a condition for enlargement that Russia be completely satisfied it and that their 
satisfaction be written into the terms of the NATO-Russia deal, we will have made 
enlargement hostage to the Russians and given them a veto. It will take 100 years — or if 
you're an optimist, 50 years — for the Russians to be completely confident in themselves and 
in the vision that you and President Clinton have for an undivided Europe. 
In addition to the other arguments for proceeding with enlargement — because the Central 
Europeans deserve it and because Europe deserves it — there is the matter of tactics: the 
Russians need to be given fixed points, clear; stationary landmarks on the terrain that they 
must navigate. They must resolve the uncertainty over NATO-Russia relations against the 
background of absolute certainty that enlargement is moving ahead. This is the way, to cite 
Dr. Johnson, to concentrate their minds. But it concentrates our minds too. Your message to 
me, which you have sharpened here today, is that we must make sure that we have done 
everything in our power to give Russiasomething to say "yes" to. They often have trouble 
taking "yes" for an answer. You also said that the Russians have intensified their opposition 
to NATO enlargement, but.... 
• 
SECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 8]
C 0 6 7 0 2 7 6 2 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
SECRET 8 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: I meant the Russian authorities. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: I do not agree. I am hearing more realism and pragmatism 
in my conversations with the Russians, as well as a growing willingness to make use of the 
timetable that we have. Leon Fuerth and I will have a chance to test this proposition in 
Moscow next week. France and Germany are also critical to this process. There is no 
question as to which three leaders matter most to Boris Yeltsin: you, Helmut Kohl and 
President Clinton. That is partly because of the good personal chemistry each of you has 
developed with yeltsin, and also because of the importance of France and Germany. But I 
do not accept or agree with what you said twice earlier, that France and Germany have a 
better understanding of Russia than the United States.... 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: That is not what I said. I said that France and Germany inspire 
more confidence in Yeltsin on this particular subject. That is why the Russians look to us to 
be the honest broker. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: Then I have a problem. I suspect I know why the Russians 
respond to you that way — and I will be equally frank about this to Chancellor Kohl 
tomorrow. The Russians may believe that, at the end of the day, Chancellor Kohl and 
President Chirac will lean on the Americans to delay the Madrid summit. If that is serving as 
an honest broker, then please don't get into that business. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: Do not forget that, if there is a new drama in Russia, it is the 
continental countries in Europe who will most feel the consequences, not the United States. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: Mr. President, we will feel the consequences too. At the 
beginning of your eloquent remarks on NATO adaptation, you expressed concern about the 
partial withdrawal of the United States from Europe. Except in the narrow sense of tioop 
levels, the United States has not withdrawn from Europe and never will. We see ourselves as 
part of Europe and we share your destiny. That.is why we want France in NATO. France is 
more than a European county — it is a transatlantic nation and a partner of the US in other 
regions of the globe. So you are with us beyond Europe, and we are with you in Europe. We 
are here to stay. Just as our fates were linked in World War I, World II and the Cold War, 
they are linked in the post-Cold War era. That is why we must maintain the maximum 
degree of solidarity as we approach the moment of truth over NATO enlargement and 
NATO-Russia. We will try to bring finesse to the effort, but it must be finesse combined 
with firmness of will and steadiness of nerves. Without all these things, we will not succeed. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: One question: If three, four or five countries enter NATO, will 
there be U.S. troops and U.S. weapons stationed there? 
SECRET
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 9]
C 0 6 7 0 2 7 6 2 'IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
9 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: This will depend on the collective decision of the Alliance. 
That decision will take into account the larger context. One of the key questions we have 
faced with the Russians is what they call NATO infrastructure on the territory of new 
members. They fear a kind of Blitzkrieg-level buildup of armored divisions and military 
airpower, but this is a phantom fear. In the NATO-Russia dialogue and in the talks on the 
CFE Treaty, we have to establish rules and provide a measure of predictability —.preserving 
necessary flexibility for the Alliance, but addressing legitimate Russian security concerns as 
prudently as we can. I can assure you that if, say — just to pick an example out of the blue 
— Romania were to become a member of NATO, the American defense commitment to 
Romania would be as firm as it is to France or the UK. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: But my point is that if we do not introduce U.S. troops and 
equipment on the territory of new members, and if we have an agreement or charter with the 
Russians, we will have the elements of a solution. That is why I am an optimist. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: Why do you refer only to U.S. troops? Surely the issue here 
is foreign troops or Alliance troops. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: There should be no one's troops. The principle is the thing. You 
must understand that Yeltsin -- and I hope his health is all right -- is a man who did not attend 
the Grandes tcoles. He didn't go to Harvard. He is, nonetheless, a man of sensitivity, 
although not someone who was trained to say one, two, three in Cartesian fashion. That is 
why you need a warmer approach to him. Just saying one, two, three will not work. The 
relationship between Yeltsin and President Clinton is warm because Bill Cligton is a warm 
man -- he doesn't say things are black or white, and he listens. Obviously, he makes a 
decision afterwards, but he has the right touch. In dealing with Yeltsin and Chernomyrdin, 
you need that touch. They are not computers, after all. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: If I can be frank, Mr. President, ever since you saw 
Chernomyrdin and Primakov in Lyon last summer during the G-7, my colleagues and I have 
been dealing with the consequences of the warmth you displayed to them. They heard you 
say that there are three issues, NATO adaptation, NATO-Russia relations and NATO 
enlargement. You indicated to them — or they claim they heard you indicate — that we 
must follow a certain sequence: work on the first issue, adaptation, and then on the second, 
NATO-Russia; depending on how things go on the second, we will look again at the third, 
enlargement. The implication — or their inference — was that enlargement would not go 
forward unless and until NATO-Russia was worked out. This brought joy to their hearts. 
They understood this to mean that the process of NATO enlargement will depend on Russia's 
willingness to come to terms with the Alliance -- or at least, that we will postpone 
enlargement if there is no prior agreement with Russia. I know your colleagues, with whom 
I've talked, say that is a distortion of what you said, but that is how the Russians interpreted 
it. 
• 
SECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 10]
C 0 6 7 0 2 7 6 2 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019 
-"SteRE-T-- 10 
You know, Mr. President, that President Clinton is capable of great warmth in dealing with 
foreign leaders. He has always dealt with Yeltsin in a sensitive, sympathetic and human way, 
but he feels that he must not be in the least ambiguous on the subject we are discussing. If 
we convey any qualification or ambiguity about our resolve with regard to enlargement, the 
Russians will conclude that NATO will postpone enlargement, and that will be the end of it. 
It will never happen. They will have won the game. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: We need to look at the cost-benefit analysis. I repeat that to impose 
something on Russia would be a big risk. NATO enlargement is not urgent -- although I will 
never say that publicly, of course. We need to look at the cost-effectiveness of proceeding. 
My conviction is that there is a 99 percent chance that we will,resolve this problem • 
successfully if we use the proper skill. On the issue of foreign troops and equipment on the 
territory of new members, I think we can postpone that. And an agreement between NATO 
and Russia, even if it does not have much content, can help the Russians to save face. When 
you want something, you cannot humiliate the other,party. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: But the Russians also have to help us help them. They have 
to cooperate with us in finding a face-saving way out of this impasse that is largely of their 
own making. 
Regarding the urgency of the issue, I would put it this way: we see enlaregement as 
important, and if we do not proceed on schedule with enlargement, it will never happen. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: That is a bit abrupt, a bit too black-and-white. But I agree that we 
need to do everything in our power to settle this with the Russians before the Madrid 
meeting. 
THE DEPUTY SECRETARY: Thank you for being so generous with your time. It is 
helped clarify a number of issues. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702762 Date: 08/26/2019