[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 3 QIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019 
— Crilf-I-frENI NODIS 
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
March 16, 1997 
DECAPTIONED 
Date/Time: March 16, 1997, 2:00-3:00 pm 
Place: D Conference Room 
Participants: 
U.S. Russia 
The Secretary 
Deputy Secretary Talbott 
U/S Davis 
Robert Bell, NSC 
Steve Pifer, NSC 
LtGen Richard Myers 
Amb. James Collins 
A/S John Kornblum 
Jamie Rubin, PA 
Michael Nacht, ACDA 
John Herbst, S/NIS 
David Hale, S 
Kyrill Borrisow (interpreter) 
Thomas Lynch, EUR/RUS (notetaker) 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
FM Y. M. Primakov 
DFM G. E. Mamedov 
DFM N. N. Afanasyevskiy 
Arab. Y. M. Vorontsov 
Robert Markaryan 
Dir. S. Kislya.k 
Dir. O. Belous 
Spokesman Tarasov 
Dir.N. N. Spasskiy (notetaker) 
Gen-Co1 Zlenko 
Gen-Maj Mazurkevitch 
DCF4 V. I. Chkhikvishvili 
Groshev (interpreter) 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior 
Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 6/17/2019 
The Secretary and Primakov exchanged impressions of the 
Gridiron dinner March 15. 
The Secretary asked for reports from the working group 
co-chairs. 
Dr. Davis said the arms control group had made some progress on 
START-II and START-III, agreeing to extend START-II and to a 
concept of parameters for START-III, as well as to completing 
START-II deactivation. They had agreed to a ceiling of " 
2,000-2,500 warheads for each side under START-III. Dr. Davis 
said she believed the group had agreed to measures providing 
for ,destruction of warheads.and transparency which would assure 
that the major reductions were irreversible. Russian experts 
are trying to reopen issues we believed had been resolved by 
START-I and START-II. We need also to resolve the issue of how 
START-II would be extended by each side. 
Regarding ABM/TMD, the two sides continue to present competing 
approaches. As a way ahead, the U.S. proposes that at 
Helsinki, the Presidents reaffirm their May 1995 statement as 
well as the START-II declaration and a statement on further 
reductions, and establish the principle of transparency fcr 
future U.S. plans for theater missile defense. The statement 
could provide for expanded cooperation between the two 
countries, on TMD. There would be no ban on TMD systems based 
on interceptor velocity. The only testing constraint would be 
target parameters. We would defer new technologies and 
space-based sensors to the future. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 2]
CO67036 3 Q FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019 
-151WE'r,,EffftAlia-/NODIS 
-2-
Kislyak  responded that there was common ground on START-II. 
The group had agreed-on all the START-III parameters but one: 
whether to include data exchange on nuclear fissile materials 
under START-III. Kislyak said the Russian side was prepared to 
work on fissile materials but not in a START-III context. He 
said that questions remained on rapid uploading of nuclear 
forces and on long-range sea-landed cruise missiles. There was 
a semblance of rapprochement on these questions; the Russian 
side was interested in further discussions. 
Regarding ABM/TMD, Kislyak said there were significant 
differences. The Russian side could not accept a document 
allowing high-velocity systems based on the U.S. approach. 
Kislyak recalled that, pursuant to the Presidents' guidance, 
the Part I agreement had been completed on time, but Part II 
was not. The Helsinki statement should contain guidance for 
completion of Part II. And, Kislyak said,-the statement should 
not be a substitute for a legally-binding agreement. The 
central issue was notification of plans for testing 
high-velocity systems. Such notification is insufficient. We 
need to agree what can and cannot be done. The U.S. 
formulation is not sufficient for ST1RT II ratification. 
There should be an agreement compatible with the limitations of, 
the ABM Treaty, also taking account of the Presidents' previous 
guidance. 
Primakov  said the progress on START-II and_START-III was_ 
positive. We needed to solve the other_outstanding issues. On 
Monday, he and the Secretary would report to President Clinton 
on what they had done. They should_be able_to report 
progress. A joint statement on further_reductions was quite 
possible. 
On ABM, Primakov said "I ask you to step•into -.our--shoes," _It_ 
would he hard for the Duma to ratify -START.-II 
free to wOrk on high-velocity systems , circumventing-the..ABM, - 
Treaty. The Russian side had a formula_ .The Presidential 
statement could include an affirmation that thesides - have-no 
desire to circumvent the ABM Treaty. , They- would_note:-their -
previous instructions to reach agreement.on Parts,I ;and__II-of 
ABM/TMD and that agreement on Part.II had-not_been 
They could suggest that the sides would agree not to.test_ 
high-velocity TMD before April 1999. -_-After-that date, the_ 
sides would commit to joint consultations on the issues of 
testing. If the U.S. could include this formula, we will. have. 
an ABM statement. The Presidents should 'give instructions to. 
speed up work on the issues. 
Mamedov  said he wanted to note that it was important t have a 
joint statement on chemical weapons, -Primakov  seemed- - - 
surprised. Mamedov suggested it would be tactically useful for 
the sides to have a statement. • Primakov  said he would learn on 
Monday whether President Yeltsin had submitted the CWC to the 
Duma. 
elarTFTDENTALJNODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 3 CHED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019 
-eeffr-taettaLt /NODIS 
-3-
A/S Kornblum  said the working group on European security had 
sought to prepare a joint statement with as much common 
language as possible, and to narrow the differences for the 
ministers and Presidents. It had helped that the Russians 
prepared their re-draft from our original draft. In the 
discussions, we worked from the Russian re-draft. Agreement is 
still needed in three significant areas: 
CFE Treaty. We agree on process and the goal of a framework 
agreement, but we could reach no agreement on what the 
details of the framework agreement would be. Additionally, 
the Russian text referred to NATO enlargement in ways that 
are not acceptable to us. 
(Afanasyevskiy and Mamedov asked what th-is commeht-referred to; 
Kornblum noted the references to sufficiency and stationing.)-
. 
Description of NATO's strategy:_and military posture. The 
nuclear and infrastructure references are not'acceptable.-
Disagreement on the right of states to choose treaties of 
alliance. Kornblum noted that the Russian side had 
accepted the language we now propose in numerous documents 
including the Helsinki Final Act,-May 1995 statement, and 
Paris and Lisbon documents. 
DFM AfanazirevskiAL expressed general concurrence with.Kornblum's 
account. Regarding NATO enlargement,:_he noted that- the R-ussian 
side suggested language on absence_of_preparation-for.the 
stationing of nuclear or conventional...forces.:. Afansysevs45,iy • 
termed "unacceptable" language "singJA.ng out" the choice of 
alliandes as a particular right. We can cover the point by 
putting references to Lisbon, the Helsinki: Fine'l Act,-etc. in. 
another document. - 
Primakov emphasized that these shouldybe references to the. 
documents, but not repetitionš of theformula.- :He,joked-that.., 
he had Belarus in mind. --!. 
. - 
Afanasyevskiy continued that the U-..S.,delegation-agreed,t-hat 
the document would be signed at th-e-tighest - 
nevertheless put the word "binding",:in brackets.:."This.amazed 
us." 
Primakov commented that the European,seCurity- document-i the- - 
main document for Helsinki. If we,c-in agree on it,- Helsinki is 
bound to be a great success. We can approach the document by 
stating different views: Yeltsin'opposes NATO enlargement 
while Clinton supports it. After that, however-, we-need to-
identify the way out. 
— eattF -tinsTIT-rtEL-f-NOD IS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 4]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 3 0 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019 
-eettrtiptistrpt-kb/NODIS 
-4-
Agreement on nuclear weapons and Russia/NATO would be two 
important elements. Further work, Primakov'was convinced, 
would produce progress. On CFE, there is the problem of how to 
combine certain elements. The delegations should be given 
instructions, now, to get to work tonight to try to reach an 
agreement before the meeting with President Clinton. 
The Secretary appreciated Primakov's statements of goodwill and 
noted that a lot of work remains. She asked Primakov to bear 
in mind that CFE is not bilateral. Also, Primakov should not 
underestimate the statements NATO has made in terms of the 
"three 'no's"' and the Solana sentence. She and Primakov 
needed to discuss matters and earn their pay as foreign 
ministers. We should stress common ground while not papering 
over differences. And, as important asHelsinkiis,a lot.of. 
work will remain after Helsinki. We particularly need a__ 
balance between stating and managing differences, and moving to 
common ground after Helsinki. 
The Secretary assured Primakov he Woilld be seeing the President 
on Monday. 
She expressed hope that Primakov's session at_the 'Pentagon 
would allow him a fresh perspective on the military situation, 
and alleviate his concerns. 
Spasskiy, presenting on economics, zaid.that the U.S. and 
Russian negotiators had generally agreed a text, bUt certain 
points remain. It was a point of ptinciPle in the _1_994 . 
statement that Russia would be adcoxded MFN_On..a permanent. 
basis -- that Russia would be "gradu4ted."-fibmck-sOh7N'anik 
There is the problem of figures and,numbers (for,U.Sr L ' 
assistance). Primakov intprrupted:, let. the Presidents decide 
the figures and numbers. Spasskiy 'bntinued that,GCt had 
addressed-integration issues. The -sides could agree on 1998 as 
a target date for Russia's WTO accession. ,G74Ga presents „ 
another important cluster of issuei-fdr":the,Pre'sidents,:_, 
Spasskiy said. Finally, there is the issueof_signatuie,of the 
document. The Russian side considers that the document should 
be signed by the Presidents. 
t-
The Secretary responded that Strobe hadreported on Viktor. 
Stepanovich's concerns. Larry.Summers was now baCk in 
Washington and was working with Secretary Rubin. The'Secretary 
reaffirmed U.S. interest in facilitating. Russia's_membershipin. 
international economic organizations,.but noted that mlanY 
groupings -- WTO and the Paris Club -- have mUltilateial 
guidelines for admission. 
--e=rniuMMITAIL7'NODIS 
1 r , 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 5]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 3 0 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019 
RUS/tl 
Clearances:S/NIS:JHerbst (ok) 
ACDA:MNacht ok 
EUR:JKornblum ok 
L-1 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703630 Date: 08/26/2019