[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 711 8 1 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021 
Memorandum of Conversation 
Talbott/Avdeyev — Second Meeting 
Russian Embassy, Brussels Belgium 
April 7, 1999 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Participants: 
US: Deputy Secretary Talbott, D Exec. Asst. Goldberg, D Spec. Asst. Bass, 
USNATO Officer Kostelancik 
Russia: DFM Avdeyev, Amb. Kislyak, DCM Kelin 
Meeting began at 3:30 PM. 
Back and forth at the top about Gromyko — will be visiting Brussels soon for conference. 
Avdeyev recounts story from Gromyko years that features fainting spell by Affy. 
Avdeyev then opened the meeting. 
AA: Strobe, I have the impression that the package you outlined earlier will not be 
accepted by Belgrade. What then? It's not simply an impression — I'm convinced that it 
won't be accepted: What will you do then? You're building up forces. Are you going to 
bomb infrastructure, power plants, refineries for one week, two weeks? By bombing 
infrastructure, you reinforce the humanitarian catastrophe. Do you think Milosevic will 
have nothing left to fight with? 
ST: Let me give you best answer I can: NATO military action will continue under the 
circumstances you described. You asked a number of technical military-questions, 
related to targeting, that I obviously can't answer because of operational concerns. 
As to your broader question — What next ? -- it's a good question, a fair question and 
deserves a proper answer. It's a question that figured prominently in Madeleine's 
discussions without minister before the bombing began. You know, in asking it, you're 
adopting the tactics of the Alliance, in the sense that you're posing a series of questions, 
just like NATO did in its reply to Milosevic's cease-fire proposal on Wednesday. 
AA: Yes. 
ST: I've given you the answer I can; and I sense in your question a combination of 
prediction and advice. The essence of your advice — that we recognize the stubbornness 
of Belgrade and therefore open negotiations on the basis of Milosevic's offer. We're not 
going to take that advice. We talked among ourselves here, and have ad several 
conversations with colleagues in Washington — including two conversations I had with 
Secretary Albright. Discussions are still going on in the CG meeting at the German 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 7 711 8 1 1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021 
embassy. In fact, I'm late for this meeting because I wanted to Boris Mayorsky's 
reactions to our proposals; I didn't want to walk out in the middle of his remarks. 
[Exchange on amount of time we have for the meeting; Avdeyev says he will postpone a 
press conference scheduled for 4:30 if necessary. Willing to go as long as necessary 
within theconstraints of his travel schedule. ST then resumes.] 
Alexander, I want to tell you about the two conversations I had with Madeleine. First off, 
she said she had had a good conversation with Igor Sergeyevich -- even better than the 
Gore/Primakov conversation, although she was glad to hear a good assessment of it from 
ISI. Here's what's on her mind: she would like us to explore possibilities for a 
ministerial meeting. She has no preconditions on format and is willing to consider either 
a bilateral or multilateral format — either G-8 or Contact Group would be fine. But, as 
she told your minister, Madeleine insists on having a clear sense of the purpose, agenda 
and, most important, the desired outcome, of a ministerial before she will agree to attend. 
MKA suggests three criteria that would, if we all agreed to meet them, make for a 
positive meeting from everyone's standpoint, including Russia's. They are: 
1. The meeting would be based on existing common ground among us, and focus on the 
search for additional common ground. 
2. The converse of the first proposition: the meeting should not serve as a platform for 
controversy, criticism or our respective positions or (although this doesn't sound quite 
as bad in Russian as in English) propaganda. 
3. The meeting would contribute to the positive evolution of Contract Group policy. 
Those are pretty general criteria. The question is how we would accomplish the third of 
these. .We discussed this in some depth at today's Contact Group meeting; Gunther 
Pleuger listed seven points that he thought might be common ground between Russia and 
the rest of the Contact Group: 
1. Stop the killing 
2. Stop the repression 
3. Stop the deportations and forced exodus of the Kosovar Albanians 
4. Provide humanitarian relief for refugees and the IDPS within Kosovo 
5. Create a safe and secure environment within Kosovo for return of refugees 
6. Full compliance with existing UNSC resolutions 
7. This is a corollary of point 5; that means we would include as an agenda item 
discussion of what we see as the compelling need for an international security 
presence immediately upon cessation of hostilities — not upon completion of 
negotiations. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 7 711 8 1 1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021 
I'm not criticizing Boris Mayorsky, but he was quite forceful in his response to these 
suggestions in way that suggests — and I've conveyed this assessment to MKA — that we 
probably would not have sufficient common ground for a ministerial unless we can do 
better on the elements than Boris suggested would be possible. Boris' response to the first 
point — stop the killing — was to say "who's killing whom?" — suggesting NATO was 
responsible through its air strikes of much of the killing. 
This leads me to conclude that we would be stuck on all three criteria I laid out — because 
all three would be the converse of what I suggested — the meeting would not center on or 
expand our common ground, would be controversial and would not contribute to positive 
evolution of the Contact Group's policy. But I'm a great believer in not giving up, and 
I'd be pleased to add anything I could to the points MKA and POTUS have made over 
the recent weeks. We have good channels for the days ahead, not only bilaterally but also 
via our European colleagues, such as Loic Hennekine, who I gather will be visiting 
Moscow tomorrow. 
AA: Strobe, thank you. Since our meeting this morning, I spoke twice with my minister. 
He was also appreciated his conversations with MKA. However, he did not have the 
impression that MKA had set preconditions for a ministerial; he thinks she has already 
agreed to meet him. " 
ST: Not "preconditions;" I chose my words carefully. Rather, it's the criteria for a 
successful meeting, that could serve the interests of both parties. I wasn't a party to the 
MKA/ISI call, but I was a party to my own conversations with her, and I have my notes 
right here. President Clinton, the Secretary and the rest of us have two sets of concerns: 
Russia, and Kosovo. We understand there are connections between the two, not least 
because BNY has bade clear connections. You know what we've said in reply. Here's 
the issue: an MKA/ISI meeting would have lots of visibility. If the public manifestation 
is to accentuate the profound and growing differences between us, then the question has 
to be "Would a meeting help?" MKA very skeptical that it would; rather, she fears that it 
would exacerbate three sets of problems -- NATO-Russia, U.S.-Russia and Kosovo. 
AA: I generally understand the results of the conversation. They did not agree about the 
date or place for a meeting. Strobe, I agree with you, and I think ISI would agree with 
this: that the meeting should be based on common elements, that it should not be a 
platform for piopaganda. I agree that should be the way to do it. The question is: what 
kind of contribution would it give to the work of the CG? We probably should not link 
their meeting directly to the work of the contact group. Rather the meeting should 
contribute to our overall purposes and agenda. 
Now, on your list of points. ON the first point, stop the killing: of course. On the 
second, no'doubt. ON the third, no doubt. A secure environment [for refugee returns], of 
course. But [referring to point five] there is a question, and problems, on the form to 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 7 7 11 8 1 RED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021 
accomplish this. ON the UNSCRs, of course. Strobe, our overall adherence to these 
principles in not in question. Regarding an implementation force: we're not against it, 
but it would require the consent of the sovereign state; this is written down in many 
places — in the UNSC resolutions, in Contact Group positions, and at Rambouillet. 
I'm not a military man. When I asked you what was next, I wasn't trying to get you to 
discuss your military strategy. There are still a half-million Albanians there [in Kosovo]; 
they are still potential refugees. It's possible the expulsions could continue until the last 
Albanian has left Kosovo. We have a different explanation of the reason and result of 
these expulsions. You say it is Milosevic; we think it is more complicated than that. 
There are several reasons — including NATO's bombing. Strobe, we might end up in a 
guerilla war. Milosevic won't have gas, tanks or electricity, but the guerilla war will 
continue and it will be really bad. We don't want that kind of outcome. 
What Milosevic suggests is already a sort of moral victory for you. It's not my mission 
to try to talk you into accepting his conditions. I just want to use this opportunity we 
have. Let's look at how we might organize a safe environment for refugees. As an 
option, what you suggest might place, but in real life I don't think it will be accepted. 
Let's think about this before a ministerial, to see if there is a formula that [would 
accomplish objectives but] shows NATO doesn't change its approach and that what 
follows the end of bombing would be the result of NATO's actions. I understand that's 
important to you. We need to use another element appearing on the scene — Rugova. He 
has status; he's been received by POTUS, Chirac, Kofi Annan. He's the elected 
representative of the Kosovar Albanians. He might be used, if it's his choice. It should 
be his chance, on condition that he volunteers and would be in contact with all the 
participants. 
Strobe, I'm just thinking out loud here. Perhaps we could start from the first three steps, 
not try to engineer the whole plan now. What kind of steps co\ild create a safe 
environment? Perhaps we could suggest creation of a joint temporary commission. The 
main issue it would address would be the safe return of refugees, and creation of a safe 
and secure environment. It could be headed by Rugova, and include reps of UNHCR and 
Belgrade. We might think about making part of it those who are "convenient" to you. 
The first step might be creation of local police. Defusing paramilitaries is a long-term 
process; it won't be accomplished in two or three weeks. 
Your first step — removal of forces; in our opinion, the first step must be: what steps will 
stop the exodus of refugees? Perhaps we could synchronize the creation of this joint 
temporary commission with a pause in NATO bombing. You can call it [the pause] 
whatever you like. We could make refugee returns on a provisional basis. 'For the 
international force, let's think about the UN. I realize there may be some internal 
contradictions in what I'm saying; these are just suggestions. We should work out the 
wiring diagrams together to resolve these. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 5]
C 0 67 7 11 8 1:l ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021 
ST: Alexander, this has been really productive. IN many ways this has been the best 
conversation on Kosovo between our governments in a long time (though of course, we 
haven't had many conversations on Kosovo in the last few weeks). Let's see if we have 
something here we can work with. 
First, this is not a negotiation between us over how to solve the conflict; we're not 
enemies negotiating a truce. Quite the contrary. Even though there a restrains in our 
relationship, the strategic rationale underpinning it still exists. And the President and 
MKA are trying to use Jujitsu, if you will, to turn this crisis into an opportunity and 
thereby both save the NATO-Russian relationship and bring peace o the Balkans. It isn't 
a question of us working out the solution and arrangements between us. The struggle 
here is at least between NATO and Belgrade and, I think, between the civilized Euro-
Atlantic community and Belgrade. 
While this conversation is certainly going better than the CG meeting earlier, the core 
problem remains. Rus'sia's position is dictated by what Milosevic will and will not 
accept; by what he does or doesn't want. Milosevic has long since disqualified himself 
from being the arbiter of the solution. In fact, it's an open question to us whether we can 
reach a negotiated solution with Milosevic, but we are prepared to try. But: we must do 
so on the basis of conditions laid out by NATO in the last 24 hours. This has led to 
analytical differences between us, but not core differences. 
I am prepared to go to Moscow in the next few days to see if somewhere in the mass of 
my notes and those you have spread out before you, we have the makings of a good 
meeting between our ministers (and maybe others). It's very encouraging that you 
accepted the six elements that I laid out — and the 7th is a corollary of the 5th. My only 
concern about our efforts going off the rails again has to do with the first element — 
stopping the killing. If Russia's interpretation is that NATO has to stop first before the 
rest of the conditions follow, then this won't go anywhere, for reason you don't accept 
but understand. If, however, you have an open mind — not necessarily agree, now or 
ever, to NATO's position — that when we see concrete action and implementation of 
these principles (with synchronization still open and to be discussed), then we could have 
an interesting 36-48 hours. 
On Rugova: I take your points. I had him and his team in my office, and we have great 
respect for him and what he stands for. But there are issues we don't have the answer to: 
who, what and whose. Who does Rugova speak for now? 
AA: [interjects]: I have the same question for you regarding Thaqi. 
ST: Jamie Rubin speaks to Thaqi, not me. On the second point, we would have to be 
convinced that he still has standing, among an Albanian population brutalized and 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 6]
C 0 6 7 7 11 8 1 'ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021 
increasingly radicalized over the last eleven months, to serve the purpose we're talking 
about. But it's a positive point. I can tell form this discussion that you and others are 
thinking creatively and imaginatively — and looking for a solution. 
I'm prepared to meet you halfway — in fact, I'm prepared to go all the way — to Moscow. 
Although there are some practical challenges; I don't want to get in the way of Loic 
Hennekine during his visit tomorrow. And I would want to coordinate in advance with 
the other members of the CG. Could come tomorrow, meeting through Friday. 
AA: Have to go to Cyprus tomorrow, won't be hoe until Friday afternoon. 
[Discussion about Hennekine visit and who he is, and isn't seeing. AA surprised to hear 
he's planning to go to Moscow, thought they'd old him to come later in the month. Calls 
Moscow and clarifies — had said no, but Vedrine called ISI and "begged" for meeting, so 
Hennekine will have "short" conversation with ISI — like 5 minutes — and then do bulk of 
his business with Sweden] 
With Hennekine, Strobe, we don't intend to formulate for him the ideas I laid out for you. 
It will not be some type of prep meeting before our ministers meet. 
AA (Con't): Strobe, we have some fundamental disagreements. IN the course of 10 
years we have pursued creation of an international legal field for our partnership. You've 
going beyond this field — beyond the UN charter, beyond the Founding Act — and we 
have a fundamental disagreement about what you have done. We want to bring peace to 
Kosovo and to bring you back within the legal boundaries. There's not only Kosovo 
between us — but also this question of legality. That means that outside this field, there 
might be no cooperation between us. You say Milosevic caused unacceptable damage. 
We're not apologists for him; he responsible for major ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. The 
state was incapable of dealing with others; Milosevic is the main cause of that. But there 
are others responsible — the KLA and its suppliers. And you, with bombing, have a share 
of the responsibility. Now looking back, there was the possibility to sign a peace 
agreement, but what you proposed at Rambouillet, in chapter VII, caused the Serbs to 
reject it. We could have pushed them to sign without that, but... 
Then at Claibert, the responsibility for failure rests with Milosevic. Now, we are trying 
to protect the people of the FRY (who. are subject to your bombing) — not Miloseyic. 
Now, we could look at something different with Ushakov. If we get agreement to a 
ministerial on the 13th or 14th, then your idea of coming to Moscow is good. 
ST: With your proposition, you've flipped around what I suggested. Let me review 
what I was suggesting. I'm willing to come to Moscow to continue our discussions and 
see if we have the basis for a ministerial meeting between MKA and ISI. I can't yet, on 
the basis of what I've heard, recommend to MKA that she meet w/ ISI. Why? Because 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 7]
C 0 6 7 7 11 8 1 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021 
while I've heard a lot of positive things, much of what I've heard, especially in your last 
set of remarks, suggests to me that meeting would either start, and stay, in a rut — or start 
on a positive basis and deteriorate into mutual recriminations. Either way , it would not 
contribute to progress. 
Alexander, how do you respond to the proposal I laid out? Obviously, you can make a 
counterproposal if you like, but if you're suggesting that a precommitment to a 
ministerial meeting is required before we continue our discussions, then forget it. 
AA: Strobe, I need to call Moscow to discuss what you have said. As I mentioned, I'm 
going to Cyprus from here, but I want to review your proposal with Igor Sergeyevich. 
This is very serious, because he believes a precommitment [to a ministerial meeting] 
already exists. 
ST: As I mentioned earlier, Madeleine wants to determine in advance what will come 
out of a ministerial before agreeing to attend. 
AA: I think there is a misunderstanding. 
ST: One of many. And by the way, there is also a fundamental disagreement between us 
— including about the nature of our fundamental disagreement. 
Let me make a couple other points. First, Alexander, cropping up in our exchanges is a 
kind of language that is contributing the problem., It's words like "insanity" being used to 
describe NATO's actions... 
AA [interjects]: Who said this? • 
[Back and forth on which statement ST referring to.] 
ST: In today's MFA statement, you've said "criminal order." And in our conversation 
here, you basically characterized our policy as illegal. I don't want to dwell on this, but I 
think there ought to be another criterion — not a condition — for an MKA/ISI meeting: that 
the tonality of their exchanges reflect the constructive substance of the meeting (although 
we haven't yet established that the substance will be there to justify a meeting). 
There's also one other issue, and it's the one Yevgeniy Maximovich and the Vice 
President discussed: that there are people in the Defense Ministry and elsewhere in the 
Russian government who are preparing shipments of military equipment for the FRY, 
and who are eithersharing, or preparing to share, intelligence with the FRY. Alexander, 
this issue is one of life and death, especially for the U.S. and Allied personnel flying over 
the FRY. As I've said before, this issue has the potential to ruin irreversibly relations 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 8]
C 0 6 7 7 11 8 1IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021 
between Us, as well as whatever chance we have to turn this situation to the benefit of the 
U.S. — Russian partnership. 
While we've slipped back a bit in the last few minutes of discussion, we had begun to 
identify the basis for a worthwhile visit by me to Moscow, which in turn might lead to the 
basis for a good and useful meeting between our ministers. If there's any aspect I can 
clarify as you discuss what I've said with Igor Sergeyevich, I'd be happy to do so. In 
terms of logistics, we can make adjustments to our travel plans until midday tomorrow. 
AA: Strobe you shouldn't be surprised, like a naive girl, that strong words are being used 
in the press. You have been using strong language as well. The term "aggressor" was 
used by Boris Nikolayevich with full understanding Of what it means — and it's not only 
emotionally but also legally correct. 
As for supplying the FRY with weapons, this should not even come up, because BNY in 
his statements has made our position clear. On sharing intelligence, there is no basis for 
suspecting cooperation [between Russia andThe FRY]. There are hypotheses, but no 
basis — and we don't work on hypotheses. 
Strobe, please excuse me and I will call my minister. 
[Avdeyev departs for about 10 minutes, then emerges from Kislyak's study to continue 
the conversation, this time in the central hall.] 
AA: Strobe, I have talked to ISI. I relayed to him all that we had discussed today, 
including your offer to come to Moscow to continue exploring possibilities. He asked me 
to convey the following to you. Strobe, you are always welcome in Moscow. There are 
many issues in our relationship that we are working on, and if you decided to come we 
would set up productive meetings for you. 
Igor Sergeyevich told me he continues to believe he and Madeleine should meet soon. 
We do not want to see things continue as they are indefinitely. We want to help you get 
out of this situation. Need to move forward. 
ST: We'll think about what you have said; I need to report to Secretary Albright. We 
will be in touch, if not this evening, then tomorrow morning. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771181 Date: 06/16/2021