[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 7 11 7 1 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771171 Date: 06/16/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL 5 1516177 
'UNCLASSIFIED/SENSITIVE vlq, 
t_.? \ 0 
Frank Wisner Conversation with Jaswant Singh, June 7 co S ee pep as see'' I called on Jaswant Singh in his hotel and at his request. He and I met alone. I iz 
‘k
lnd him 
very tired, a mixture of his long flight and, I suspect, the results of overwork during 
recent weeks. I also found him de_eply apprehensive. The visit to the United States wis—IE.0c 6
his idea -- one the Prime Minister embraced wholeheartedly. It contained an element of 
risk for the Indian government if the visit goes badly and is attacked in the press at home. 
The Prime Minister's peril is nothing compared to Jaswant's. He made it clear that if 
things go wrong in the United States, his enemies in the BJP would be merciless. 
I told Jaswant I believed that while the United States harbors the deepest concerns 
about India's decision to test and that.these concerns have not abated in their intensity 
over the weeks, he would face interlocutors who are serious and pragmatic, individuals 
who want to achieve practical goals which will contain the crisis, restore the basis of a 
nonproliferation regime, and open the way for a greater degree of peace in the region. 
While I did not speak for anyone in Washington, I felt I could reflect my 
assessment of the mood. That mood was not accurately portrayed in Secretary Slater's 
speech to the US-India Business Council (Naresh Chandra had reported the Slater 
remarks). While the Administration cannot appear to reward Delhi and Islamabad, it 
realizes it must engage South Asia and find a way to cooperate. An eye had to be kept on 
Congress, I added. It is my suspicion that if the Administration does not prepare its case 
with India well and coordinate it with our P-5 partners, its political opponents will block 
any attempt to modify , much less repeal, the Glenn Amendment sanctions. 
Jaswant made the following points about his mission and the Indian view of the 
situation which we face: 
• Confidence. The core of the problem the US and India face at this moment is 
confidence in each other. Confidence is the precondition of dialogue. Indians know 
we believe they deceived us. They are adamant they never lied  to us. Jaswant 
admitted the Indian side had not answered questions it was not asked. Jaswant sees 
the key to his mission a step toward the restoration of confidence. 
• Anti-US, Anti India. The Indian government had made a conscious effort to stem the 
flow of anti-American rhetoric and had been largely successful. The Indians are 
unhappy with what they see as the flow of anti-Indian hyperboIe in the United States. 
The Prime Minister will have a hard time (?) selling items like a moratorium on 
testing. Jaswant asked that we respect (?) the intensely political nature of India and 
be very careful in the words we choose and use in White House and State Department 
statements. 
-- I told Jaswant that I felt much of the sharp edge of American commentary had worn 
off. We were shocked by India's decision to test and shock produces anger. While 
UNCLASSIFIED/SENSITIVE 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771171 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 7 7 11 7 1 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771171 Date: 06/16/2021 
UNCLASSIFIED/SENSITIVE 
2 • 
the deepest concern remains, the edge of anger has wom off and it is replaced with a 
sense of determined pragmatism. I suspected he would find Washington ready to 
define and achieve practical goals. In fact much useful reflection about South Asia 
and the security circumstances of India and Pakistan had surfaced in our press. 
-- On the subject of rhetoric I made an appeal for restraint. I told Jaswant that once 
Indian exploded its nuclear devices, India's words, like those of Pakistan, counted 
more than ever. Loose threatening rhetoric creates genuine international alarm. The 
United States had learned the idiom of restraint during the Cold War. India's leaders 
need to do the same now. Jaswant admitted the point and agree it was valid. 
• The Sino-US-Pakistan axis. Jaswant reported Indian views about cooperation
between the U.S., China, and Pakistan are widevread in Indian political circles.
American ambitions to work with China, while understandable, are seen to come at 
India's expense. The United States has turned a blind eye to the transfer of 
technology to China and the same technology is repackaged for export to Pakistan. 
-- I urged Jaswant to moderate this notion. US engagement with China is an 
important objective and in everyone's interest. We do not indulge in clandestine 
technology transfers and our policies toward China and Pakistan will not be designed 
to make India suffer. At the same time, I had the gravest doubts about Indian 
assumptions and believe that Jaswant should explore in Washington the openings of 
intelligence exchanges and analysis. I could state flatly that Indian charges of 
Chinese missile preparations in Tibet and base development in Myanmar were 
overdrawn in the extreme. Equally, India needs to listen to what we have sought and 
accomplished in our non-proliferation dialogue with China.
-- Equally, Indian fears that Saudi Arabian transfers of CSS missiles to Pakistan will, 
in my judgment, prove to be unfounded. While not informed of details, I doubted the 
Saudi missiles have much value and I have heard nothing which would lead me to 
believe they will be sent to Pakistan. I suggested that Jaswant discount their 
importance and left him to consider why they had played no role in the Gulf War. 
• India's agenda. Jaswant asserted that India is ready to tum its de facto commitment 
to refrain from further tests into a de jure one and would look at formulae of 
association with CTBT, including the design of unilateral reservations. I said I 
assumed Washington would be ready to explore CTBT options. I could assure him 
that it is not our way to proceed by diktat. We will riot say "sign CTBT" and then we 
will talk. 
-- India will continue to test missiles and does not want any surprises. Deployment is 
another issue. I urged Jaswant to consider carefully the wisdom of missile testing 
under present circumstances and bluntly argued against deployment. I believe the 
issue of deployment must be probed further. 
UNCLASSIFIED/SENSITIVE 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771171 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 7 7 11 7 1 -IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771171 Date: 06/16/2021 
UNCLASSIFIED/SENSITIVE 
• 3 
-- India's cabinet has decided to press ahead with the Chemical Warfare Ban 
ratification and wishes the United States to recognize the decision as a signal of 
India's current disposition. India seeks to cooperate with the international 
comrnunity. 
-- India is ready to negotiate and join an FMCT and halt the manufacture of fissile 
materials. 
- Jaswant informed the Secretary General, on the same afternoon, that India is 
prepared to begin unconditional talks with Pakistan and include consideration of 
Kashmir in those talks. He provided no details. 
-- At the same time he indicated no Indian thinking about how to engage  China. He 
listened to my suggestion that the Prime Minister receive the Chinese official 
traveling to Delhi for border talks. The Chinese take gestures seriously. Jaswant did 
not comment. 
Jaswant made it clear that at this stage in the crisis and in our relations, India could 
be preptaradtaconsidcrtheiortsnf g monitoring ideas which 
Secretary Albright mentioned after the recent_P-5 meeting. The political basis for 
extemal, including American, involvement of this nature does not exist. I 
underscored the determination of the Five and the US to focus on Indo-Pakistani talks 
about Kashmir. India and Pakistan need to engage and India could count on pressure 
to do so. 
• What Jaswant wants to take home. Three items are on his mind. He is looking for an 
open door to consider the following: 
-- A statement on nuclear disarmament. India does not expect nuclera 
disarmament now, tomorrow, next year or for a long time. It logysi ommitment 
to that goal. Jaswant will not debate nuclear disarmament theology in Washington. 
-- Comfort on technology. If India, the US and the P-5 can reach a modus vivendi, 
can India look to access to civilian nuclear technology? 
— Nuclear power. Specifically, India wants to develop n.sslea___ii•  vwer reactors and 
needs external technology. 
-- Repeal of the Glenn amendment was not on Jaswant's list. 
• Talks in Washington. Jaswant looks forward to his time with the Deputy Secretary. 
He would like  thirty minutes with the National Security Advisor. I discouraged 
Cabinet calls, including Secretary Cohen, at this stage in our dialogue as the public 
UNCLASSIFIED/SENSITIVE 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771171 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 7 7 11 7 1 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771171 Date: 06/16/2021 
UNCLASSIFIED/SENSITIVE 
4 
nature of such calls could spark adverse political reactions and lead to premature 
discussion in public of India's and America's options. He attaches great importance 
to our controlling leaks; Jaswant argues that the leak of the Prime Minister's letter 
was most damaging. 
I also told Jaswant that he should explain India's view of its security dilemma -- being 
frozen out of the Asian security paradigm -- but that he should keep his expose brief and 
concentrate on his core objectives. 
• Things undone. Time did not permit me to get into Indian thinking about how to 
engage China or deal with the US in this regard. As a general matter I found•Jaswant 
troubled by China and the state of India's relationship with it. I was also unable to 
explore in the right depth the questions of missile testing and deployment nor was it 
possible to consider how his objectives and ours could be meshed. I: made it clear 
that we are not in a position to signal steps which would appear to reward Indian and 
Pakistani decisions to test their nuclear devices. 
Nor did I discuss the bomb blast in Pakistan. Naresh Chandra briefed Jaswant on the 
event. I looked hard at Naresh; he and I have talked often of India's involvement in acts 
of terror in Pakistan. Naresh said nothing further to Jaswant. 
Finally I noted Jaswant is seeing a number of people and audiences while he is in New. 
York. I suggested he explain India's case but eschew any mention or discussion of 
specific Indian objectives. These should be reserved for official dialogue. Jaswant 
agreed. r 
Frank G. Wisner 
(sains/india98/nuke/fgwjasw) 
UNCLASSIFIED/SENSITIVE 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771171 Date: 06/16/2021