[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 0 3 69 2 F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
draft 1/25/97 9 a.m. 
Moscow, Russia 
January 23, 1997 
—CONFIDENTIA-L—
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
SUBJECT: Talbott/Fuerth Delegation Meeting with 
Russian Foreign Minister Primakov 
11:40 a.m., January 23, 1997 
PARTICIPANTS: 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior 
Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 6/17/2019 
RUSSIAN SIDE - 
Foreign Minister Yevgeniy Primakov 
Deputy Foreign Minister Georgiy Mamedov 
Robert Markaryan, Assistant to Mr. Prithakov 
Nikolay Spasskiy, Chief, North American 
Department; Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Igor Neverov, Deputy Chief, North American 
Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
Interpreter 
AMERICAN SIDE - 
Strobe Talbott, Deputy Secretary of State 
Leon Fuerth, National Security Advisor to 
Vice President Gore 
Jan Lodal, Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense 
Ambassador James Collins, Coordinator, 
NIS Affairs, Department of State 
Steven Pifer, Senior Director, National 
Security Council 
John Tefft, Charge d'Affaires, American 
Embassy, Moscow 
Steven Seymour, Interpreter 
Primakov: Our meeting comes at an important moment — on the eve of a summit; at 
time when new Administrations are developing new agendas and platforms and teams. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 70 36 9 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
We need to do all we can to ensure that new elements do not cancel out previous 
achievements. For us, relations with the U.S. are a primary concern, and we want 
them to develop further in a positive direction. 
Talbott: Thank you. We agree. The new Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense 
have been confirmed by the Senate and will be sworn in by the President soon. 
We have here in Moscow a full interagency team — from the Departments of State and 
Defense and Treasury, from the National Security Council staff, from the Arms 
Control and Disarmament Agency, and, of course, from the office of the Vice 
President. We're imposing to this extent on your hospitality because we're charged by 
our President and Vice President to prepare for the meetings they'll be holding with 
your President and Prime Minister. 
I talked to Ambassador Albright and she wanted me to pass you-three-messages: 
— First, she looks forward to building on the solid work done in the last four years to 
establish strong U.S.-Russian relations. 
— Second, she will have a strong team to support her in dOing that, reflecting the 
importance we attach to U.S.-Russian relations. Although Ambassador Albright cann6t--
make official appointments until she is sworn in, sheAntendsAotrecommend=to,the-
President that he nominate Ambassador Pickering-as-Under,Secretary of State for - - 
Political Affairs. She will also recommended to the President.— and I think it is very 
likely he will agree to — the nomination of Jim Collingras-our-new:Ambassador-tw-:- - . Russia. . _— 
— Finally, she hopes to meet with you soon, perhaps in Moscow. She is nOw 
notionally thinking in terms of a trip to Europe in llieilatter:part1of.February. Meeting 
with you then would allow you both to build on theAyotkiliat,Prim&Ministev----------:----- --- 
Chernomyrdin and Vice President Gore will have doneinlWashingtonirrearlr,--L 
February in preparation for the meeting between our twolkesidenthn.March. 
Primakov: I am happy that Secretary Albright has chosenArnbassadors.Pickeringiand 
Collins, not just because they have established names for themselves-forzdefending.. 
American interests in their contacts with us, but becauseatheyarebotlFhighly:-.7:.--.=1---.,-. 
professional individuals. Their appointments are a sign of the importance, that the 
United States attaches to its relations with Russia. Itthe -United States had 
nominated a skilled Ambassador to serve in Moscow, it would haVe shoWri-a-lack of 
seriousness towards relations with Russia. If Congress-confirms -these two,-
appointments, we will see a team in place that we can definitely work with. We, of 
course, are also happy that you were re-appointed as Deputy Secretary of State. 
Yesterday, I spoke before the Federation Council about the need to develop our 
relations with the United States on an equal and reciprocal basis. I was also briefed 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
yesterday on your discussions here at the Ministry. Prior to the summit there must be a 
step forward on ABM. I understand that you confirmed the need to move ahead on 
ABM and that you discussed a possible summit statement that would reaffirm the ABM 
treaty, as well as affirm the previous work we have done on low-velocity targets in 
Theater Missile Defense (I'MD) and indicate your willingness to look at high-velocity 
systems. We would like a commitment about not conducting non-laboratory tests of 
such (high-velocity) systems during the talks. 
We need to move for ratification of START I and take advantage of opportunities now 
with the Duma. Our views are not those of some Duma members, who believe that the 
agreement gives the U.S. an advantage. We see it as in the interests of both sides. 
These (ABM/TMD) decisions will help us a lot if we can get a formal announcement of 
them. Give some thought to the views we expressed on prolonging the implementation 
of START II Treaty. They are not a whim. An extension of the reduction period 
would reflect reality and help a lot. It would also be-good-if-we could tie the - 
abandonment of non-laboratory tests to the new implementation deadline for START II. 
Talbott: When the President and Vice President asked us to come, their instructions 
were framed in terms of probing, exploration and joint brainstorming. They asked that 
we speak clearly and candidly about our own position,- and that includes the outer limitš 
of what we can agree to. They asked us to bring back the essence-of what we heard 
about your positions for their consideration in order to-prepare for a-successful meeting 
of the Vice President and the Prime Minister. The conVersations we had yesterday - - - 
were in that spirit. We have succeeded in obtaining -START II ratification in the U.S. 
The President frequently says that every time he and-Mr:-Yeltsin-meet-, they agree on 
the need for Russia to ratify START II. The President-hopes for Russian ratification so 
that we can put that issue behind us this Spring. With regard to your views to 
prolonging the implementation of START II, we have'takeii-note7d what we've heard; 
and we trust you've listened carefully to the difficulties dial Your' proposal' poseS 
But we will go back to Washington and look careftilly at th&whole range' of issuei 
we've been discussing here. 
Just to make sure that there's no misunderstanding whatsoever on some important 
technical issues, let me ask Jan Lodal to recap our wtitkplan regarding ABM: 
Primakov: First, let me say that I agree we are not-negotiating; my mandate is also to '-
explain, to clarify, and to listen. 
Lodal: Regarding the testing of TMD systems under-the--ABM Treaty we have agreed 
to limit non-laboratory testing of any TMD system to testing against relatively slow and - 
relatively short-range ballistic missiles. Modern strategic= missiles fly at eight - - 
kilometers per second. We agreed for Part One to limit tests to targets that go no more 
than five kilometers per second. The speed of an interceptor is also an issue, and we 
agreed that if it is relatively slow (not more than 3 km a second), it would not be 
considered an ABM. Now we are discussing faster speed missiles and other CBMs. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 4]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 2 RED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
We are now discussing Part Two, including some CBMs. The President stated that for 
the next three years we have no plans to test fast interceptors. But beyond that we are 
not able to provide assurances of not using fast interceptors in TMD. We have one 
alternative system that will use a missile which is faster than those covered in Part One. 
This system has no capability against even a single strategic missile. We will provide 
you data establishing that basis, which we have prepared for our own legal reasons. 
We think these commitments should satisfy your side about our concerns. We will 
continue our discussions to reach an agreement. We hope to work on language 
reaffirming the ABM Treaty and TMD demarcation as agreed. We have also agreed to 
take up a suggestion of Deputy Foreign Minister Mamedoy for developing guidelines 
for a START III agreement with the understanding that there will be no negotiations 
until START II is ratified. Finally, we will make a heroic:effort.to finishhefore our 
two presidents meet in March. There is a lot of work,,..-but-weIwill_try.  
_ - 
Primakov: You are to blame for the fact that there-is-no agreementpnfast interceptor F
systems. We know full well U.S. practices. You never do something for nothing. 
Our Navy has real concerns in this regard. Let's „ _ _ 
On the meeting with Secretary Albright, we would-be happy-if-she could-travetto--, - - - 
Moscow. Let me suggest February 21-22 — half,way,-between the Gore-. ,„,_ 
Chernomyrdin Commission meeting and the presidential-summit.ilIt.the 
wishes to stay longer that, of course, would be OIC,,„ :4;4 
Talbott: Secretary Albright's visit to Moscow wilt almostcertainly-be.a-part.of a--
broader European trip. We will find the right time anditwork,through our,embassiesolL
set a date. thal ';•-•t; c!c_.;1   ;I, fins 4._-.1)-!1!“. 
;4nrsI,Hirkw2ilon ?"0" 
Primakov: Would you like to discuss my meetinibwith,NATO; Secretaryk.General'q'tiiiv to 
Solana in front of this group or privately? it!i•k 
tz 
Talbott: Let's discuss it here. As you know, we stopped in Brussels and Javier gave 
us his impressions of the meeting. He had very positive impressionsiof the-nrie,eting,;;;;;;;4,,i ,, , „in ig 
i...4.-161 it) r...q; 
Primakov: I don't have negative impressions either. I felt before the meeting that 
we'd start arguing our position and that he would notAave,the mandate,to discuss the,t,„-
issue in detail. My fears were unfounded. As it happened;_ he really_did:have_a--, 
mandate. We had a very business-like conversation. Let me try to clarify our position. 
— First, I want to underscore that it is not correct-to.believe that our consultations and--;
special relations with NATO are seen as compensation:for our,acquiescence2to 
enlargement. We still believe it is best to have no enlargement or defer enlargement. 
However, in order to be sure the dividing lines do not lie deep, we are engaged in 
discussions with you on these issues. We are not seeking compensation for NATO 
enlargement. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 5]
C 0 6 70 36 9 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
— Second, we are convinced that the Russia-NATO "document" - let's not call it a 
"treaty" or "charter" - Solana suggested should have legal force. We were divided on 
this question. Solana opposed a legally binding document. He said it would be 
difficult to get 16 parliaments to ratify it. 
Talbott: That's 17 parliaments. 
Primakov: OK, but if the document is "normal" and it includes responses to our 
concerns, we will get it through our Duma — there's no doubt about it. Regarding 
ratification by the 16, when you admit any new members to NATO, you are going to 
need to go through the ratification process, so this is-nottoing.th_be:as difficult as you 
would make it seem. Why does it need to be'biridiiii?:;Diffe-feiitliiiii-pfe'stiolii ---. - 
Mikhail Gorbachev and Jack Matlock have spokewabout-the!assufanceitgivenin-1-0-90  
by Western leaders that no members of the Warsaw Pact would be admitted to NATO 
should Germany be reunified. Since that time,--weliaveznotbectifte,abigeer-,threat:-------'77 ------ — 
However, these assurances given to our leadership-henotAfeeivinfpleiriefited:':-Miiiii..i&-"-i,-;-4-7 7:-'=
why we need a binding document. 
— Third, I outlined to Solana two groups of problemC-i,Theiairidhterielatedrlil--
building on Lobachevsky geometry, a geometry idikhich-parallenines-zultimielyuz:% 2-] -27
converge in space. He admitted these lines [NATOiadaptationNATOtnlargeinentr4z-4-771, ---:-11;:- 
and NATO-Russia] would converge. We want the,,convei-gelleeiforiiiilized-inz.--:727----
document. We want not only a mechanism for Russia-NATO consultations but also a 
framework of principles about modernizing CFE.-,Ihisvoilld:Make if-linpt*iblettf 
move NATO infrastructure and nuclear weapons eastwartO:VeNtafitTall.ofThiSv'kifteri 111;::
in a single document. 
— Fourth, there is a list of other problems to disciisiwith.NAVOI Yutl like to discuss Illy 
-;1;ina tr-4,,In 
Is it correct that NATO was set up to defend against an outside threat? 
t: .4i •-• 
Talbott: That's correct. lis ihe 111Peillig vt.ry 
Primakov: We know that we can have consultatiofisiwith:=NATO'but2We-willshi4no LL' 
voting rights. This is not adequate. There are twa-pošsible situitionšvh-erel the 14,41
possible use of force is involved and where we mUst-haN./e 714E4=4— 
• ,• ;; 
First, the use of force outside the NATO area of responsibility; 
L 1.7  i w -4=i 
Second, the use of force on the territories of countries inside-NATO in tlieabSerice dia 
specific external military threat. For example, I am talking about a crisis between 
Greece or Turkey or a serious dispute, let's say over ethnic minorities between 
Romania and Hungary. We seek the same voting rights as others (in NATO). 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 6]
C 0 6 7 0 3 69 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/201,9 
On the first level, the purpose is consultations aiming to develop joint decisions, but we 
recognize that if there is a failure to agree on a decision, everyone can act on his own. 
It's not Article 5 that we object to, but the second level is the possible use of force by 
NATO outside of NATO or within NATO countries in the absence of an outside threat. 
This is the position presented to Solana. We had a very useful talk. I have informed 
the President and the Prithe Minister. 
Talbott: Your account tracks with Javier's, both with regard to proposals made and 
differences identified: Let me comment. I feel that we collectively and you and I 
personally are working to solve this problem; we're not fighting the problem. You and 
I have been talking about this since last July, when we met on the margins of the Gore-
Chernomyrdin meeting. In the mOnths that followed,.we didnot_make as mdch 
progress as we had hoped. You and I had our beitsonversationon:this:whole:set:of 
subjects in London last month. Secretary Christopher;lby,:the'mayragrees.with!that!_.:_-_±--- .-
characterization. It was frustrating for him that_weyere_notable4olmakemore 
progress on NATO-Russia last fall, and he is glad-:thaCwe7seemrfmallyitdlittdttifft.-off--------
the dime. 
Primakov: By the way, I was sorry that Secretary Christopher broke his wrist. Please 
convey my best wishes for his recovery.  •  _  _  • 
14 c.  • er..7. 1+1 
• •-• 
Talbott: Thanks, I will. 1i; , 
-171-7; AR.; 
We see a real chance for progress in the coming months...-:_,It 
that we use this time. We do not see, however, that-Aveiareloperatingagainstan,---ti,-!4.--.4-4,-,-4.-t- - 
artificial deadline. Both U.S.-Russian relations andlsTAT&Russianirelations are 
transcendentally important in their own right. We: and.,ouriAlliestare!working to make 
both sets of relations right. 
— n list of pl:m;;:ti-nr,.., disc;Rs 
While we're not working against a deadline — while we will keep working no matter 
what happens in other arenas and on other tracks in; the,Summe4 atidTm referritigfofc, 
course to Madrid — we recognize at the same time that we are not working in a 
vacuum either. 
Let me give you some specific responses to your points:1=-:  
First, I am glad you said Russia is not seeking compensation,.for the enlargernentrof-.4.,- -t-4_,:_.,--_,!1'g 
NATO because we do not seek in this way either an agreement that gives you 
compensation. We don't see the issue in terms otour:owing—youl.compensation 
requiring compensation. Rather, we are seeking arrangements that will be in the 
interests of the U.S., the trans-Atlantic alliance, the-largertrans,Atlanticcommunity.of-Fkr, ,,t  
which the U.S. and Russia are a part, and the new Europe of which Russia is a key 
participant, and, of course, in the interests of the Russian Federation itself. We take 
your proposals in that spirit. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 7]
C 0 6 7 0 3 69 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
Second, we understand you do not agree with and will not approve of NATO 
enlargement. We will respect that. We'll keep trying to explain our position in terms 
you'll understand and accept, but we're not going to hold our breath or hold up our 
plans and programs until you see the wisdom of our case. 
What is good about the discussions we're having here is that I sense we're both 
prepared to make progress in areas where we can agree despite some lingering 
disagreements over the fundamental question of enlargement. Russia seems prepared to 
work out the clearest, most cooperative, most constructive relationAhip possible with 
NATO, even while disapproving of enlargement. 
Georgi Enverovich [Mamedov] and I are working hard along those lines. 
Now, my colleagues and I have listened to what yo.0 said-to Javier. :We understand . - 
what you are saying about "legally binding." We have a-profound problem with the 
idea that the entire charter or document must be legally binding-. • 
A general comment: when we met with the President and the Vie& President, they 
instructed us to find ways to work with you quietly on-solutions that- we can reach in 
the next six months. In this, we don't want, to define problems in a fashion that makes 
it impossible to solve them. I'm concerned that if you and the Russian government 
define your objective as a legally binding charter, you,niay beTutting-us on a course 
that can end only in a tupik (dead end), or a whole labyrinth of tupiks. We could spend 
the next several months arguing inconclusively about whether the,entire,charter or-- - - 
document can or should be something that requires ratificationty our parliaments:,
That would not be the best use of that time, to putit ±:. 
In other words, I'm concerned that we'll end up stuck in two areasof disagreement 
rather than one, which is difficult enough. 
la34 ,An1; 
NATO and Russia disagree on the issue of enlargement' NI: se,-.with,no-prospect of our. -- 
agreeing with each other on that subject. We could-make,a Xlifficult situation--
impossible if NATO and Russia cannot agree on the,form int which to express the areas 
about which they do agree. 
As I say, there is no way we can resolve the first area of disagreement. But we do see 
a way out of the second. There are problems with a -tflegally„bindingr -treaty, or., 
whatever you call it. The key is the phrase "legally binding:r Any such document 
will to be approved by 20 or more states. Approval-ouratification will take along time 
and could generate damaging and distracting controversy. It- could-become a lightning 
rod, generating killer or eviscerating amendments inAhe American Congress-and . 
elsewhere. Ratification could become hostage to a larger political process. 
Therefore, our strong preference is a formal public political commitment at the highest 
level, i.e., the presidential level. This commitment would be subject to immediate 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 8]
C0670369 2 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
implementation. It would be an organic document that could evolve. It could be a 
solid skeleton; we could subsequently put flesh on the bones, as NATO-Russia relations 
develop. 
Primakov: Are you principally worried about the time frame on ratification — how 
long it would take to get it ratified? 
Talbott: That is one of our concerns, but it is not our principal concern. Our main 
concern is that the kind of undertakings and understandings we're talking about are 
appropriate for a high-level political commitment, not a treaty. 
Primakov: Once the document is signed, we could begin to implement immediately 
while the process of ratification proceeded. There are many examples of this. 
Talbott: As I say, we have a number of concerns. We have laws-in our country that 
require Executive Branch undertakings such as arms control agreements have to be 
submitted to Congress. Congress exercises its prerogatives and insists on approving 
legally binding agreements. 
Also, the U.S. takes seriously its responsibilities to NATO. The Clinton 
Administration couldn't envision a comprehensive document formalizing 
understandings between NATO and Russia which would be legally binding- and -which 
would constitute an agreement that de facto or de jure needs ratification or that 
impinges on the flexibility of the Alliance. 
But let me come back to what we can do and what we-should. do.. President Clinton is-
very serious about making a high-level political commitment to the document we have 
been discussing under the rubric of a charter. Think of it as ai matrioshka doll; a ' • 
nesting set of understandings and arrangements, some.of which could in fact be legally 
binding, specifically those relating to CFE. 
e * • 
You have stressed your military concerns with Javier Solana. We've been disctissing 
with Deputy Foreign Minister Mamedov and his colleagues'a frameWork agreement 'on.' I — t"' 
CFE that we might reach in the coming months. Once,the actual-CFE modernization 
agreement was fully negotiated, it would have to be ratified. This addresses the 
military aspects of enlargement. We have discussed-a framework agreement on CFE 
adaptation dealing with moving from group to national ceilings,' overall reductions, " — 
avoiding destabilizing concentrations of militarY forces; including stationed limits oft 
forces and other measures which will increase predictability, mutual confidence and 
stability. . I s 
,
The CFE framework would constitute guidance to negotiators who would then 
complete a treaty that would be legally binding. I would ask that, as you think about 
what we have said, you consider adopting a public position along these lines. 
. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 9]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 21F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
Something like this: "We are trying to formalize NATO-Russian ties and are looking 
ahead to legally binding agreements on some key military issues." 
But I urge you not to define our near-term objective as a comprehensive document that 
itself would be legally binding. 
Primakov: I fail to understand your logic if you are ready at the presidential level to 
recognize the binding nature of the commitment. 
Talbott: I didn't say "binding." 
Primakov: If the President signs a document, it is binding. How then do you 
characterize a presidential signature? If you don't ratify-but maintain--the binding 
nature of the document, I would recommend you say so, just as you recommended 
what I should say publicly. You say that under CFEyou want to move to national 
ceilings. We want to solve two things. We want-toleep CFE-uridergrotipteiliii0 
while also maintaining national ceilings that would-not allow NATO infrastructure to --
move closer to Russia. We would seek a formal binding agreement on that. If it is not 
binding, then we would have no interest in such a document. The measure of this 
"binding" quality is critical. Ratification is impoitant when' we talk-about futtird 
measures. Otherwise, basing our relations with NATO on-declarationivill not'be 
binding. As long as I am a Minister, I could not tecon-ithend signing such,a dõttiment. 
Talbott: Yevgeny Maximovich, let's not get too hung Up on semantics:and legalisms." 
How much of the problem is semantic and how much is substantive? The issue here is 
not adjectives and adverbs: it's whether the docuniént *tires' subMission to;—
parliaments or not. I said that the President is prepatedldtonsider Tinijör; public, 
political commitment that would bear his imprimattir and perhaps thatbfJothet key 
leaders. That's a serious proposal, which I hope you'Itakd seridusly:: -.-; 
; 
Okay, so let's stay with the question of what words we use to describe what we're 
looking for. You are using the Russian word "obyazuylishehiy,P Thar-trandatesina'-
just as "binding" but as conveying an "obligation" :dr icommitment., PI - 
that if the President of the United States signs a doCumentv it constitutes-an ' 7;W ;-
international commitment. a, AH , . 1. 
Let me give you an example. We have been operatingformorelhan-20 -years dn the,' 
basis of the international commitment entailed when-President Ford and President 
Brezhnev signed the Helsinki Final Accord in 1975, bringing' the CSCEinto existence. 
That was and remains an important international obligation. It is not by our definition 
"legally binding" in that it was not submitted for ratification. But it is a political 
commitment — and obligation — of an enduring character. When Secretary 
Christopher suggested the idea of a NATO Charter in his Stuttgart speech, that was the 
kind of commitment he had in mind. 
44: s 
1 Jr: 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 10]
CO 6 7 0 3 69 27IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
NOw, I repeat and I stress: we would also work towards specific technical agreements 
that would be themselves legally binding insofar as they would be part of CFE 
adaptation. 
Here's my point about what we say in public. Yesterday, you met with a group of 
reporters and said that Russia will insist on a legally binding charter. We have a 
difference, clearly, but I do not want to draw these differences out in public. I don't 
want the headline out of our delegation's visit here to be about a Talbott vs. Primakov 
argument over "legally binding." 
Primakov: Well, let's talk about who's causing problems with public statements. The 
recent statement by State Department.Spokesman Nick Burns was not Useful. He said 
that "irrespective of whether or not an agreementlis_reached_between;NATO.and 
Russia, NATO enlargement will go ahead." Thatlindsof stateinentwill-drivems:intoa-
corner. It is not conducive to success. Unfortunately,i today;:_anlike:in; the:PSSR; -wer 
have public opinion. _ 
I didn't get a clear answer on why you object to my,suggestiowthat-Ave could-postpone 
ratification of a NATO-Russia agreement and still.goahe4with4mplementation.,
is absolutely critical. Not everyone in Russia will:behappy-with,whatever.we agred,totri---_,-,..  
NATO has a certain image here. A NATO-Russiaagreement-twill-notbeapplaudedby 
all. 
Talbott: We envisage a NATO-Russian documentAhatcouldlookiaheadtto-.ceitain-i, 
military understandings that by themselves would,be:binding,-,-That!srithe,best-we:can    
do. ajlci 
I've been making the point since I got here — in fact,I'Aebeeminaking the poiriCiikm prIpTi!f1;11 Or ;4 
earlier meetings between the two of us: in Moscocsda.stlulf,dn NewArork 
in London in December — that we hope you'll begin to take."yes" for an answer, even 
when it's not totally and exactly the yes you wanti_1;think4e've-ggt anOther 
point here. - 
" hinilino' • ..::(Aiveviag 
As for Nick Burns's statement, I don't know the context:or,whatiquestionthetwas .z.vg!-,1 tit-A:1101 
answering, but I do know he was stating a fact. 
If we can't come to an agreement now, let's give itsomepore,thoughtrAf4greethat .,-- 13, 
this is a critical issue. It is not just about the juridical-status.of theagreement;!bUtialso ben 
about the content of the agreement. If we spend all oUrtime.Larguing • -, 
never get the substance right. 
s t'S 
At a minimum, let's work simultaneously on form and substance, so that one doesn't 
hang up the other. I can envisage that we can reach one agreement this spring and have 
further agreements in future years. This one agreement would constitute a commitment 
on the part of our head of state to work in CFE and other forums to limit military 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 11]
C 0 6 7 0 3 69 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
deployments on both sides, and to increase military cooperation between the two sides. 
That document would not only be useful internationally, but it should be helpful in 
managing opinion in a number of countries. 
Leon and I sat in on the Lisbon meeting when the Prime Minister talked to Vice 
President Gore about managing Russian public opinion, so we're aware of how this 
issue figures in the thinking of your leaders. 
Let's go to the bottom line, Yevgeny Maximovich. That's what we came here to 
explore. You are a past master of the art of the possible, and I am a past student and a 
current practitioner of that same art. What we are trying to do together is find 
something doable in a time frame that meets our overarching purpose. I respectfully 
suggest that a high-level political commitment meets your zneeds2nd-that-Russian-
insistence on a "legally binding" agreement is neither-necessary nor-helpful:- = -= 
Primakov: Let me be frank about two other things.- Solana-took_the same line. I get 
the feeling just how high intra-NATO discipline is at this point. First, I am sure you 
would agree that Russia's relationship with the U.S. -is,-much-broader , -than-our, -  - 
relationship with NATO. We have heard suggestions of-further U.S: economic 
support, of ideas for changing some of the G-7 functions -to G-8.- I wanryou to know - 
that we will not buy the idea that these are compensation- fonan inadequate NATO- 
Russian agreement. These ideas are part of our bilateral relations, not part of a NATO-
Russia document. 
Second, you suggested that a forward-looking transparent document could-provide 
some way out. I say yes and no. Why no? I asked Solana in the long run if NATO 
could not agree to the admission of Russia as a member. He just shook his head. This 
is a question that will be raised in our Parliament. I If yolL openahe,RussianrNATO 
document to the prospect that NATO transformation,Would,be:possible,,thermay be 
some possibilities. — • • It—, 
I promise you that, unlike others, if we were in NATOove -wouldn't make a fuss over 
the commander of NATO's southern flank. If you included well thought-out language 
that could leave open eventual Russian membership in-NATO, then thercare, 3
possibilities. j , 
Talbott: Okay. I think. we are now getting somewhere:. We too-are sayingyes-andno4.- - 
We're saying, "here's what we can say yes to, and here's what we=can only-say:no- -t.i i= 
to." Now I hear you saying that your reaction to what I've said is- "da-i nyet. We 
need to continue to look for ways to maximize theMaPaand:to minimize the "nyet." 
We can't completely eliminate the "nyet" but we can manage the "nyet" in the context 
of the "da". 
Now, let's go to the specific issue you've raised — how to use, and refer to, the 
adaptation of NATO, to address our problem. NATO itself is undergoing an internal 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 12]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
and external adaptation. You follow both closely. Both internal and external 
adaptation continue to offer possibilities for Russia. General Myers will be meeting 
with General Ivashyov and we will be meeting Defense Minister Rodionov this 
afternoon to discuss these issues. 
Secretary General Solana originally brought to the U.S. the ideas he presented to you 
about a consultative mechanism that might, as it evolves, develop into a joint-
decision/joint-action mechanism. This plan has gotten attention at a high level of our 
government. For example, Javier and Leon and I discussed it with Sandy Berger, the 
new national security adviser. We helped flesh out the plan Javier brought to 
Washington. 
You should not underestimate the importance of this proposal.;-This is-an extraordinary- --
plan in scope, in concept, in potential. It is unprecedented. - - 
We can't permit the best to be the enemy of the good.-
A11 of which is to say, we are prepared in the charter' tb: go beyond CFR-- We could- • —
spell out the need for intensified consultations on nuclear doctrine-between NATO and - 
Russia. If it is helpful, we could look at the possibility of reviewing the NATO 
strategic concept of 1991 so as to reflect changes that have taken place in the past six 
years as well as to anticipate and encourage future,changes: zWe could involve-Russia-
more in NATO Combined Joint Task Forces and other such cooperative ventures. 
Now, let's talk about whether the door of NATO is open to Russia: Sonie see this as a 
question of pure theology. But you know, even the,most-intellectually disciplined 
theological debates come down to a question of what -One-believes:. Eet me tell you. '1 , 
about my President and what he believes. Your President;SorikYeltSin,. is-dealing 
with a U. S. President who believes very much in the evolution of Russia: 'This goeš ' - 
back to the non-Euclidean geometry we discussed in'Londorf and 'the possibility, as you 
put it, of parallel lines converging in space or time. 
_ L " efiz =li 
I'll be frank with you. Thank you for complimenting.NATO on -maintaining-internal - 
discipline, and you can count on us to do so in the -months aheadi- liut-on the question- " 
of even the theoretical possibility of NATO being open'tO -Russia, there is not total 
unity in the Alliance. All I can do is speak with absolute authority for the President of 
the United States. I was the notetaker when PreSidents-yeltsin and-Clinton had a-one-
on-one working lunch at their summit in Washington in September-1994.- The 
President said the process of enlargement should not exclude anyone; the evolution of - 
NATO should look ahead to, and help bring about, the evolution-of Russia: - - 
Just before that lunch, the U.S. Defense Secretary and the German Defense Minister 
had expressed quite different views on this subject at a public event in Berlin. Bill 
Perry, reflecting his own convictions and the view of our President, refused to close 
the door on NATO's someday being open to Russia. President Clinton and President 
• 1 1 
1,1 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 13]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 2 'IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
Yeltsin referred to this exchange between Perry and Ruhe; they both agreed that Perry 
was right. 
Now, we all recognize that if the issue were ever to go from being theoretical to being 
practical, we would be talking about a very different Russia, a very different NATO 
and a very different Europe. But, Yevgeny Maximovich, that's what this iš all abinif 
working together to bring about, over the long term, the right changes — the right 
differences — in what is now a very imperfect world. 
Primakov: I have listened closely to what you've said. We had a discussion along 
these lines when you and Chris and I met at the Waldorf last fall. It was the best part 
of what otherwise was a difficult conversation. So let's keep developing these 
thoughts. _ _ 
- 
Now, back to the short term: In May, you pick the first candidates for NATO 
enlargement. The initatives to invite new members ,_comesfrom7:NATO.te:Ifyou - 
ready to admit Russia, why don't you say that theoretically you could invite Russia? 
Talbott: First, the meeting at which NATO designates,the•first_countriesmabe,in-,.. --
July. Second, keep in mind that the process of NATaenlargement-is:toing-ahead•-,i,----,,,,- :_-_-_-;-_,=-1:-_:,..6-4 
transparently — no one has been invited yet. Thirditthat-process has-
element of self-selection about it. We have given.members..in,the,Partnership 
the opportunity to nominate themselves. A numbenhaveJaiseditheir;hands; 
"Pick us." What the Alliance will do in July is select three, four, or five countries. It 
will do so on the basis of criteria well known to you:ra 
$14;leStii-Yil Of pure eileolo?v 13111 von e:Neti the 
But even as we say,• "you... you ... and you," we-will,,ketthinldng;aboutAndr-A-2!--k 
conveying some important messages to the rest. One,message,-:.thetProcess‘willbeift-litmt, Yiiiir 
ongoing; it will continue to be transparent; it will aintimie.to beinclusive; vzry midi iv the e, 
exclusive. tinr.i.-A,nthe:.rinri-i-.ticiifie7:11 RN:HIE -Hy WC: 
pui it, ttfrar.-Aki :=T*11,-“;-
Second message: We are doing everything in our power to ensure that enlargement will 
not disadvantage the legitimate security interests andipoliticalkaspirations thoso.who,.i-
are not selected in the first tranche. I think it's literallyaecase that those4af usmho le,,do so 4, the
work on this issue in Washington and Brussels and•Other capitals;,areispending 'as muChIATn 
time on the question of "what about the others?"_aswpamon:,the,question; 
about the first?" — perhaps more time. We are particularly concerned•about,the,en;iqn 
impact of enlargement on those new democratic states:that-are-not selected,-or,thathave Wittn;i;Ig-itTfi 
not stepped forward and asked to be selected, but thataretrying Ao.consolidate 'reform mitnt SiWn; r:?-1-:11t 
and move toward integration with the rest of the worldhi shnliP-1 :11111 httlp 
Now hear me out here, Yevgeny Mazimovich, and liitiii'earefullSi:' We see Russia in 
that category. We see it as a nation whose leadership is committed to reform and 
integration. We're aware that history and geography and other factors make Russia 
something of a special case, in various respects. But when it comes to our 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 14]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
determination to take Russia's aspirations and concerns into account, we have very 
much in mind the prospects for Russian reform and integration. 
However, we can't deal with the challenges posed all by ourselves. We need you to 
work with us, to meet us half way. 
As the Vice President and the Prime Minister discussed in Lisbon, we're acutely aware 
that we are sending signals in these conversations to our publics. We hope to dampen 
down and not exacerbate controversy. We hope the NATO-Russia charter will make it 
easier for the President, the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister of Russia to 
manage their public. We want part of the message of the charter to be that despite 
disagreements, we have overarching interests that can continue to broaden, to deepen, 
to converge; the charter could be a road map on how-we are going to move forward. 
Primakov: What you said is highly positive. My final point:;,letmeend,on=a 
merry note. On TV recently, former Foreign Minister.Kozyrev said thatin-1992-he- ---,—
wanted to develop good relations with NATO but-was,cut short-when NATO decided - 
on enlargement. 
, - 
Talbott: I am not sure I understand why that is such a merry-nbte, but let me say that I 
consider our conversation today positive. Let me conclude by asking Leofi Fuerth to 
describe the upcoming meetings between Vice President,Goreand-PrimeMinister. - 
Chernomyrdin. 
Fuerth: On the first level, we are reviewing the many proposals.by the Russian side - - 
for Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission Session 8. We know there is a strong desire on 
the Russian side to deal with the regions. We are -ging 4o respond to each of your 
proposals. We have our own ideas. The role of the,Commissionis. tolsearch out-the c 
areas of possible cooperation and we hope to be ableAd achieveSOme progresš.,
The Commission operates on a second level outside the formal GCC structure. The 
Vice President and Prime Minister will prepare forbeiupcoming summit between our- 3..rf 
presidents. In that dialogue they can speak not only,aslrepresentatives Of theiri:, "' el" c•N I\
governments but also as practicing politicians. They both speak:the languageofriSk. 
In that sense, each is valued by his President. We arel trying nowlo sugkest a structure 1.• •
of dialogue to sort through these areas of discussion at the-GCC and then taige them to '-
the level of the two presidents. It is not necessary for the Vice:President and-Prime 
Minister to agree, but they should push ideas forward withi'value added'in the hopes- ,:z 
that the presidents would be better able to resolve the issues.- - 
Primakov: Thank you. This has been a useful discussion. We have got a lot more to 
resolve. There's no way we can move forward without compromise. Such 
compromises will, we hope, help us resolve these issues in their entirety. Will you 
come to Moscow with Secretary Albright? 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 15]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 2 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019 
Talbott: It's not clear at this point. Certainly it's not excluded. She may ask me to 
join her. I can tell you that she and I have spent a lot of time tallcing about U.S.-
Russian relations in general and her determination to develop a good working 
relationship with you. 
Primakov: Good. I attached a lot of importance to the work she and I will do together, 
and I think we've laid a foundation for that today. See you soon, I hope. 
• t4!.1:--r! 
.32...:eit314-4::::: =4f:eft 7- t-s-
2 - 7 . 
11:-1 
,!!p, :.-A-ruviF 
;lir. 1. .it-"1,-4 
f:Cir 130i t4 
ir! t1 1 1.,111! The !=-0i-o!!, V.1±.1.!!!-• !r-yn 
4111i ilW11 ttlii" of ti!!- 
2stt!-;.- if5t1 
eniii41-!:!Lct=r1 iL:Nd 111,. 
in rimifiune thf - v r2-1111 pniv 4 4, 
12_0 iliNenrt bill 11CNO a-, prorating 1-)k)ip.klolis. 
• 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703692 Date: 08/26/2019