[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 7117 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021 
[RELEASE IN FULL 
Memorandum of Conversation 
Talbott/Avdeyev — First Meeting — Breakfast 
Hotel Royal Windsor, Brussels Belgium 
April 7, 1999 
Participants: 
US: Deputy Secretary Talbott, Acting EUR DAS Swigert, D Exec. AsSt: 
Goldberg,,D Spec. Asst. Bass 
Russia: DFM Avdeyev, Amb. Kislyak, DCM Kelin 
Meeting began at 8:15 AM; during opening pleasantries, Kislyak reached over to grab a 
croissant and knocked his OJ all over the table. Brief distraction. 
AA: Strobe, how do you find things? 
ST: Alexander, I came out on this trip to se what's going on in the states bordering 
Kosovo — and to address their hopes and fears. We visited Tirana, Skopje, Sofia and 
Bucharest; and also stopped on Athens. In all the frontline states, we found a very high 
degree of anxiety about the future. Three issues concerned them the most: 
1. Refugees: they have generated not only a humanitarian crisis, but also, in Skopje, a 
threat to the existence of the state. 
2. Continuation of the air strikes is the source of controversy within these societies — and 
therefore, an irritant for the governments. 
3. Also concern for the impact of this crisis on Russia's relationship with NATO and, 
more broadly, the future of Russia's role in the region and in Europe. 
After five days on the road, one aspect loom over all — refugees and resolution of this 
issue. It's at the core of what we're trying to accomplish. 
• The reason I was glad to hear you're attending today's Contact Group meeting is to see if 
there is any common ground between the U.S. and Russia for the basis of establishing a 
return to diplomacy — in the first instance while the air campaign is underway, but 
perhaps later after a possible cessation of air strikes. 
The end-state of this process — and here, Alexander, I'm speaking from my own thinking, 
not from the formal positions reflected in the papers faxed our to me overnight — should 
we the following: that at the end of the day we have a state on the map of Europe called 
Yugoslavia. There's a lot of concern, including among frontline states, that the map will 
be redrawn, either along ethnic lines or by violent means — and particularly by both 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 7 7117 8 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021 
together. Part of the challenge is to see, at the end of this, whether the map of Europe 
still contains Yugoslavia. 
There's another factor: we have a regime that's carried out ethnic cleansing against a big 
chunk of its population — which is not only morally repugnant but a threat to peace and 
stability in the region. 
Therefore, the international community has an obligation to step in and impose a solution 
that: 
1. protects the fundamental rights of the Kosovar Albanians to live without fear and 
govern the basic elements of their life within the borders of the FRY. That requires 
that security be provided not by the central government, since Belgrade has 
demonstrated that it's doing the opposite, but by some sort of international security 
presence. 
2. but at the same time, does not render changes to the borders or territorial integrity of 
the Yugoslav state. 
Before getting to the details of these immensely complex issues, need to touch on one 
semantic question: the difference between sovereignty and authority. We're thinking 
about a solution that recognizes Belgrade's formal control but acknowledges that 
Belgrade has lost its authority to govern Kosovo. And by "Kosovo," I mean the general 
term — maybe 90% of the area.. We acknowledge there are portions of Kosovo with Serb 
populations and strong cultural significance for Serbs. 
Several things would have to happen in order to create this: 
• Remove Serb forces from Kosovo 
• Return of refugees 
• Disarmament of the KLA 
• Deployment of an international security presence of some kind which, to be honest, 
will have to be there a long time and with at least the acquiescence of Belgrade. 
Kislyak: The tacit agreement of Belgrade. 
ST: Has to be more than that; it will be no help if we have an ongoing war between 
Belgrade and the security force. Let me add a parenthetical: this approach clearly has 
lots of costs. As we have thought about it, we have also looked at alternatives. This is 
better than any of them. 
The organizations to be involved in creating and implementing such a force are the 
obvious ones: the UN, OSCE and NATO. We can talk about the proportion and 
• 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 3]
C O 6 7 7117 8 ;IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021 
/ sequencing between them. I think we need to spend a lot of time on the merits of the UN 
and OSCE, but NATO would have crucial role, because the force would have to be the 
principal organ io respond with force to forces in the region. 
Last point: Madeleine is working closely with the Contact Group members (other than 
Russia). They've worked out certain basic principles that must be met before cessation 
of hostilities. Think you know what they are. We've seen not evidence that Milosevic is 
willing to comply. Yesterday's move [announcing unilateral cease-fire] further 
reinforces his unwillingness to comply. 
But: I'd like to, and authorized to, explore whether Russia would be prepared to see 
which of these principle it considers sensible and which would form core of a UNSC - 
resolution — which would have the effect of pushing this back toward the UN, and 
therefor.e push the UN back toward being part of the solution. 
AA: Strobe, thank yOu very much. You will recall events that took place 15 years ago 
and see the logic of entering war that you cannot get out of. It's common to come up 
with formulaics while entering the war. I seem to recall how we got here, but you go 
down into war like you have predicted. But not everything will go the way you have 
predicted. I can't imagine a Yugoslavia with its center in Belgrade and with autonomous 
centers in Kosovo and Montenegro, and the implementation structures you've chosen. 
[AA recounts parable of Tupolev aircraft. Tupolev Jr. designed a new airplane and 
showed the drawings to his father, the renowned aircraft designer. Tupolev Sr. declared 
that it would not fly. Son rejoined that the all the calculations had been performed and 
reviewed, and they demonstrated that it would fly. Tupolev Sr. said he didn't care what 
the calculations suggested, it wouldn't fly. Son went ahead, built prototype — and Sr. was 
right — it crashed.] 
While we consider whether or not to accept Belgrade's signal, the number of refugees 
will increase. I fully agree that creating refugees is part of Milosevic's policy. We are 
not satisfied with him [Milosevic], but don't demonize him. It won't go the way you say 
it will. The Serbs will harbor lots of hatred for the Kosovar Albanians. It will continue 
for 10 years. It seems to us that it is easier to bring the refugees back to Kosovo than to 
care for them and feed them in other countries. Russia sees the West holding major 
responsibility for the refugee flows. Milosevic's actions are in reaction to the NATO air 
strikes; the big refugee flow started after the air strikes began. Bill Walker and his KVM 
monitors did not report increasing refugee flows before they departed. 
You have started to radicalize the process. Instead of using antibiotics to treat the illness, 
you used surgery. It failed, and the patient might die. There are big stakes for regional 
stability. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 7 7117 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021 
/ 
I agree that it was not a strong statement from Milosevic. There was nothing on 
withdrawal of troops; and we don't se anything on refugee returns. But this [i.e., returns] 
would start with commencement of negotiations on a political settlement. 
I see that it's possible to go back. The main thing is whether you want it or not. I 
understand that it's an issue of saving face for you. We know what that's about; we used 
to be in the same situation. Serbs' hatred of the U.S. is so great that any step [by 
U.S./Allied forces] within the borders of Serbia, on Serb soil, whether escorting refugees 
or rescuing a missing pilot — they will fight you. 
There are consequences from what you propose for Russian/U.S. relations and the world 
as a whole. if you use the most radical methods, you must realize that you don't have a 
scenario for steps further along. You still have idealistic models of what will happen in 
two or three weeks. 
This is not just critical for our bilateral relations, it's also tragic. We are approaching the 
point where it might be irreversible. Everything we're doing with you, everything we've 
started to believe in, is in jeopardy. The hardest part for us — for people like me and 
Kislyak who were communist party members — was starting to believe in the system you 
are part of and suggested. It's the same for many others in Russia — everyone was part of 
the communist system. 
There's already been damage. START II is no longer viable; I believe Ushakov already 
told you this. Strobe, certain stereotypes were starting to break down. We had started to 
value our relationship with you and this concept of partnership. This was one of the 
major results of President Yeltsin's two terms. The destiny of Russia will be defined by 
the succession to President Yeltsih. Isn't that important to you? Or is Milosevic more 
important than that? 
Strobe, remember how good the last bilateral summit was. We had an agenda of ways to 
find together solutions to manage conflicts. President Yeltsin was courageouS enough to 
declare that Russia will stay out of this conflict. Behind this declaration is his conviction 
to maintain relations with the U.S. This signal was more important that the signal from 
Milosevic — but we have the impression that you don't pay attention to it. 
There is a certain distribution of roles here. You say the U.S. wants to maintain the 
relationship, but you cannot overstep [overlook?] principles; that's why you have to fight 
Milosevic. But you continue the surgery. Russian public opinion is overloaded now. 
Everybody except the communists are unhappy, because you're giving them [the 
communists] this big gift. 
Strobe, let's together use our will and break [sic] the situation. We will do-everything we 
can to help fix things, but we have to return this to the political track. President Yeltsin 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 5]
C 0 6 7 7117 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021 
has said that a military solution is a bad way to cure a humanitarian tragedy. In spite of 
the crisis, in Russia we are getting on with democratic life. It's a happy life despite the 
current situation. 
The most important thing to us is our bilateral relationship with you. Igor Sergeyevich 
told Madeleine that the exit from this crisis must be the result of the Russian/American 
partnership. Are you ready for that? If you are, there are certain possibilities. For your 
allies, and for the whole world, it would be good to have this result. 
I don't think the Contact Group will produce a creative solution. Your allies won't go 
beyond agreed lines; we [Russia] will follow our agreed line. Just in case Igor 
Sergeyevich and Madeleine give their agreement in principle to this, would be.interesting 
to see what we could do together. We know Madeleine is planning to come to Europe. 
Perhaps she and my minister could meet for half a day. This is our signal to you. But it 
could not be in Brussels, the NATO capital. The preparation for their meeting would be a 
manifestation of our partnership. If you can give me the signal to go ahead today, or 
through either Ushakov or Jim Collins, that would be great. 
ST: What would the expected outcome, and the agenda, be for this meeting? 
AA: (Pauses) One might think of different variants. What might be useful would be to 
draw some lines from the Milosevic proposal, though without calling it that. Even in the 
face of the refugee situation, it would be unjustified not to start negotiations. You have a 
signal from us. A signal from your side — a pause over Easter — would signal a move to 
the political track. But the only response from you is devising ideas that don't work. 
ST: [Thinking about scheduling, continuing discussion] Know you have to go to 
Contact Group meeting. 
AA: I didn't come here for the Contact Group meeting, I came to see you. I wasn't 
planning to go to the Contact Group meeting. Would you be free to continue this over 
lunch? 
[Back and forth on setting up follow-on meeting] 
ST: Let me respond, and I'll start'with your last point. I don't think there's any chance 
that Madeleine will agree to a meeting on the basis of either variant you just offered, 
which are different sides of the same thing — either pick up on Milosevic's proposal, or 
talk about or signal that we would take advantage of a pause to restart political track. 
Neither of those are what she would regard productive use of her time with your minister. 
I'd like to suggest that we use a follow-up discussion to see if there are other ideas that 
would serve our purposes. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 6]
C O 6 7 7117 8 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021 
What I think Madeleine would regard as a good basis for returning the nexus to the UN 
Security Council would be something along the lines of what I suggested earlier. The 
essential elements would be, in shorthand: the Serbs out; the refugees back and an 
international security presence in place. By "Serbs," I mean the VJ, MUP and related 
paramilitary forces, not Kosovar Serb civilians. We recognize there are long-time Serb 
residents of Kosovo; their rights would be protected. 
Those are the basic elements, but not all of them — and please, Alexander, don't treat this 
as a debate in which silence equals assent. Just because I haven't responded directly to 
everything you said doesn't mean I accept it. 
If Madeleine and Igor Sergeyevich are to meet, we have to find ways to get beyond 
strident debate and formal exchange of well-known positions. I say that neutrally; I'm 
not saying we're 100% right, you're 100% wrong, and you have to agree with everything. 
But it's not productive to keep going over that same ground. 
.64,wd) 
lI found one interesting asymmetry in your remarks th I'd like to respond to, and it's the 
following: Russia blames the U.S. and NATO for oi ng something disastrous and 
dangerous; but we don't insist on parity and say that Russia has done something 
disastrous and dangerous. IN fact, we regard Russia's participation in the 14 months of 
negotiations prior to the air strikes as productive, constructive — and sincere. We don't 
think you were playing a double game. 
Where does that leave us? With some profound disagreements. The first is over the 
I nature of what we're dealing with, You may dismiss it as demonization, but this is what I 
believe, especially after my visit to the frontline states this week: we have seen, over the 
last eight years, an escalation and pattern of behavior by Milosevic and his forces which, 
if left unchecked, would have ignited a much larger war — and called into question the 
"Europe" which the U.S. and Russia identify with and want to see Russia integrated into. 
That's how those of us who care passionately about US-Russian, and NATO-Russian 
relations a force-based solution, even though it crated major stress between the U.S. and 
Russia. 
We may, on another occasion, spend more time on the history of this conflict, and how - 
we got to this point. But for now, I want to refocus this conversation on the present. You 
asked a question that I want to answer in the affirmative. Your question was essentially, 
"Does the U.S. want to see and exit from this crisis that is a vindication, and affirmation, 
of the U.S.-Russian relationship?" You bet, for several reasons: 
Any solution that excluded Russia would, by definition, not be comprehensive; 
You asked "What's more important — Yeltsin or Milosevic," in effect asking us to choose 
between maintaining our partnership or sacrificing it for our approach to Kosovo. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 7]
C 0 6 7 7117 8 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021 
AA: [interjects]: I didn't say that. 
ST: But isn't that a distillation of what you were saying? 
AA: I don't have the authority to formulate it like that. Please, Strobe, don't take what I 
have said to extremes. 
ST: Okay. Let me go back to the point I was making. I understand the tension between 
these two objectives — maintaining our partnership and finding a solution to the Kosovo 
crisis. But I don't accept that they're irreconcilable. This is an opportunity for all of us 
to reengage diplomatically — not only for the sake of our Kosovo policy, but also to repair 
the damage to NATO-Russia relations and to put the U.S.-Russia relationship back on 
track. I going to put this notion of "saving face" aside — at least in my report to 
Washington. 
Since we're coming to the end of our time, I'm going to ask Jim Swigert to quickly 
summarize our ideas for an intensified diplomatic, dialogue, perhaps at the ministerial 
level, followed by UNSC action. 
Swigert: You've seen the Contact Group statement of April 3. We think that would be a 
good basis on which to discuss whether there's enough common ground to pursue a 
meeting and joint initiative. I'm referring back to that statement because it represents our 
fundamental elements: 
• Return of all refugees 
• Departure of W, MUP and paramilitary forces 
• Deployment of an intemational force in Kosovo 
• A political result on the basis of the Rambouillet accords 
AA: DidI understand you to say that this would only be successful with Russian 
participation? I would add, another element to that list: stop NATO bombing. When does 
the bombing stop? 
ST: When Milosevic accepts these elements and begins to act on their basis. 
When can we continue our conversation? 
[Back and forth on reconvening; decision to do so that afternoon, either after or instead of 
ST attendance at CG meeting] 
End of conversation 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06771178 Date: 06/16/2021