[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 0 36 9 8 7I ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
Draft 1 
4:19pm 
RELEASE IN FULL 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MEMORANDUM DECLASSIFIED 
SUBJECT: Talbott-Fuerth Delegation Meeting with Anatoliy Chubais; Chief of the Russian 
Presidential Administration 
January 23, 1997, 1400-1535 
PARTICIPANTS: 
RUSSIAN SIDE - 
Anatoliy Chubais, Chief Presidential 
Igor Neverov, Deputy Director, North America 
Department, Ministry of 
Lyundmila Aganina, Assistant to Mr. Chubais 
AMERICAN SIDE - 
Strobe Talbott, Deputy Secretary of State 
Leon Fuerth, National Security Advisor to 
• the Vice President 
Jan Lodal, Principal Deputy Under Secretary 
James Collins, Coordinator for the New 
Independent States 
Steve Pifer, Senior Director, National 
Security Council 
David Lipton, Assistant Secretary, Treasury 
Department 
Carolos Pasqua', Director, National Security 
Council 
Richard Morningstar, Coordinator for 
Assistance to the NIS 
John Tefft, Charge d' Affaires, American 
Embassy, Moscow 
Chubais: Congratulations on the Inauguration. It looked good on Russian TV. 
Talbott: Thanks, Anatoly Borisovich, it looked pretty good on American TV, too. We have 
had a series of important encounters yesterday and today with Russian officials. We have 
tended to concentrate so far on security issues. We have just come from a very useful 
discussion with Foreign Minister Primakov. We read with interest Ruth Harkin's report on 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
6/18/2019 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 2]
CO 6 7 0 36 9 EFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
your discussion about NATO enlargement. We are ready to talk about that and how to manage 
our differences over enlargement, but we don't want to slight the issue of economic integration. 
Perhaps we can start with a presentation by Leon Fuerth about the upcoming 
Gore/Chernomyrdin Commission. 
Fuerth: This will be the eighth session of the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission. Our objective 
from the beginning was to work with the Russian side to help it accomplish its transformation 
and find its feet in the new economic world. We have received some interesting ideas from the 
Russian side — and are responding positively — on involving the regions, parliaments and our 
business communities in the GCC. As we look at Russia today the most important thing it needs 
is investment. We are trying to insure now that we respond to the various initiatives proposed 
by both sides to the Commission. There is important unfinished business in the Commission. 
We are looking to actions which can lead to large scale, spontaneous investment in Russia. 
There are things we can do to support and help Russia, but it is Russia's place to take the key 
actions to help itself. 
The Vice President and Prime Minister also have a mandate to prepare the entire agenda for the 
summit between our two presidents in March. They will attempt-to Teview issues which they 
will then try to raise to the presidential level. 
There has been in the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission all along off-line discussions on specific 
security issues; now they must process the broadest Eissues onlhe,securitytleyel:--I now need.to 
advise the Vice President how the two political leaders can bring their special skills to bear. 
The Vice President understands military issues very well. I am assuming the same for the 
Prime Minister. Senior politicians such as the Vice-President, and;Prime Minister,_who — 
understand electoral politics, can calculate risks of solutionsOmecifictproblems:and-can-advise 
their Presidents how to proceed. In the process of discussing problems-Ahey:can add value not 
only from their posifions in government but also as -,,practicing-politiciang.; 
Nt-A jiz 0,1): :r! • 
Chubais: I understand the major issue now is securityAztlineturn,-toNATOLenlargement:Atis 
extremely important. It is extremely dangerous. What is your basic:goal in enlarging NATO? 
I know that in the 2+4 process, there was a promise not to enlargeNATO.,4 
understand it. Is it not to have a bloc whose enemy is Russia? told Ruth Harkin that public 
opinion in Russia is very negative toward NATO. Peoplei.donlariowi_whatit4sp-butithey don't 
like it. Zhirinovskiy, Zyuganov and others will have real criticism-of politicians-who support 
NATO enlargement. Lebed is about the only one who isn'-t-,consistent in attacking enlargement. 
I can imagine now what they will say about reformers in government.- They will argue that the 
reformers first destroyed the Russian economy and military. Then they sold the country to 
investors in the U.S., Europe, and to the IMF. And now these reformers are inviting NATO 
troops up to the Russian border. These arguments wilt.be verypopulari,Theaussiani,,,- fru . 
government will have to react and the only reaction will be a strong one. 
I also know that the discussion with Solana gave some moderate hope, but we are reaching a 
type of crossroads now. If, as a first option, NATO enlargement happens without a special 
treaty between NATO and Russia, it could make such a treaty impossible and lead Russia to a 
4,3 - 
2 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
much more aggressive and anti-Western position. It could lead to serious political changes in 
Russia. If, as a second option, we could design a new Russian-NATO relationship and have a 
real agreement, that would give us options to explain the decision to our people. 1997 will be 
the first time in four years that political situation in Russia is settled. NATO enlargement could 
now transform the whole political landscape. You need to know that all the politicians in 
Russia and the entire government, have the same position. Everyone is against NATO 
enlargement. This is the first time in my political life that I have the same position as 
Zhirinovskiy and Zyuganov. I want to understand why NATO needs to enlarge now. 
Talbott: That was very succinctly put. It is healthy to put these questions as bluntly as you do. 
We need to ask ourselves these questions. Let me try to summarize our position, with no 
diplomatic softening at the edges. 
Let me respond to your first point on how we got here and then answer the second question, 
which Lenin made famous: Chto delat'? [what is to be done?] How did we get to this point to 
the right kind of future? 
Let me give you some of the background. President Yeltsin-is-key to.our-President's effort-to 
make sure that we work together to build a stable, prosperous, undivided post-Cold War 
Europe. We believe that, with the Cold War over and the transformation of Russia underway, 
the Russian people are — and should feel themselves to be — among the winners.- We 
certainly don't want them to feel like losers again.- ., .• 
Now, the history of the decision. Several years ago-President-Clinton-had to confront some 
hard choices after the Cold War. He had to make the hard choices, find answers to tough 
questions. As you know from your own work, that's partof whaaresidents-do for a•living.= • 
Easy questions don't get to them. We working-level types takecareof those: • 
• 
The question the President faced was this: What do we do about NATO after the end of the 
Cold War? It came down to a clear either/or, yes,or-no.series,of questions. ..:11e=first•question 
was will NATO continue to exist after the Cold War... He answered `yes.,' :Among the a a>> • :AI I% A. 
numerous institutions and structures that would determine the fateof post,Cold WarEurope-had- = • 
to be a military institution or organization that could_deal_withthreats toithe peaceand:stability 
and security of Europe. 
Chubais: Threats from whom? 
Talbott: Lots of potential sources, including some within Europe itself: In Germany during the 
last days of the Cold War, President Bush was once asked what was the next threat now that the 
Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact were fading from the scene. He answered -with one word: 
"instability." It's not a bad answer. But it's not the whole answer. Just in the last few years 
we've had to deal with problems such as Bosnia that require the use of military force. Ethnic 
and regional conflict are a problem throughout the area we're both concerned about. Look at 
the situation that festers in the Caucasus. There is clearly a need for military deterrence and a 
3 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 4]
C 0 6 7 0 36  9 8=1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
capacity to deal with problems, internal and external to Europe — some threats that we can 
anticipate and others that we can't. 
Anyway, let me return to the logic of the President's position. Given the need for having a 
military institution in Europe, the next question was: should he advocate abolishing the existing 
NATO structure and start over, invent a new military structure from scratch? He decided `no.' 
Instead, we should adapt NATO to the new realities — give it a new mission. With those new 
realities and that new mission came, inescapably, the question of a giving it a new, broader 
membership. What should he do about those countries who were very, very eager to join 
NATO? He again faced a tough choice. Yes or no? Should they be allowed to join NATO? I 
argue that he had no third choice. There was no third choice. Any dodge or hedge or 'maybe' 
would in effect have been a `no.' Were there downsides to saying 'yes'? Of course there 
were. The main argument against saying 'yes' to enlargement was that Russia would be upset. 
Chubais: No, the main argument against enlargement-was; and-remains, that it-will-decrease 
security for everyone. 
Talbott: Hear me out, then you can attack my line-of argument. We understood-that-N-A-TO - 
enlargement would upset many in Russia, notably including those-whom:we most wanted:to - — 
support — the democrats and the reformers, people like yourself. The question was, were 
those concerns sufficient to justify a `no' answer. - - - . 
• -a 5 
President Clinton decided that the arguments in favor outweighed those against. Remember, 
there would have been huge negatives to refiising the aspirations =of the Central Europeans--- to . - - 
freezing the Alliance in its Cold War membership,k-would-havezconsigned those countries-to  
a kind of limbo; it would have said, "because you .spent the latt 50-years.ag satellites of the-
Soviet Union, you have to spend the next 50 years as a buffer betAreen Russia and theiwest.;" • 
Where would the logic or the justice have been in that outcome? That would have been 
politically and, I believe, morally untenable. -v. ,4• taZ 
Also, there were genuine positive benefits that would come:from enlargement ones-thathdve • 
already been validated. The mere prospect of joining NATiaisi aru incentive-to consolidate 
democracy and the market economies in countriesIsuch asHungary;-,the'Czech Republic:and !,i, • 
Poland. We have now seen not only more progress4n,political and economic development, but 
also more peace among them as the result of the decision to enlarge NATO. 
So after carefully weighing the pros and cons, he found the weight in favor of saying 'yes' to 
enlargement. 
But that's not a11 he said. In virtually the same breath, he added the provision that NATO and 
Russia should work together to manage and minimize the difficulties and dangers that would 
arise with enlargement. In January 1994, the President stated this objective in exactly the same 
terms — in Western Europe, in Brussels; in Central Europe, in Prague; in Kiev and in 
Moscow. The President has always wanted to reconcile enlargement with the consolidation of 
— j:"•4 
4 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 5]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 8 U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
reform throughout Central Europe and the former Soviet Union and with his desire to help all 
those countries, including yours, stay on integrationist course. 
Chubais: But will enlargement make the overall situation in Europe more or less secure? 
Talbott: The answer to that question does not just depend on us or on NATO. It so depends 
on you, on Russia. I think we have now made some progress, including this week. We are "4 ,1 '; 
now trying to work out some understandings which need to be formalized. These 
understandings can be announced at the highest level of our government. They will make clear 
the overarching commitment of the U.S., NATO and Russia to develop an increasingly 
cooperative NATO-Russia relationship. Even though disagreement remains, I am sure we can 
reach a beneficial relationship. 
My last point is to put some of the onus on you. I accept that we have complicated your life. 
The alternative was unjustifiable. What we are trying to do is not only just to reach a 
diplomatic agreement but to help you handle this issue publicly. In answer to some of the 
questions you've posed, we are trying to come up with answers that you can take as a 'yes.' 
This spring, we want to point to a number of specific undertakings that will allow us both to 
deal with this issue. 
Let me be blunt. Russia is not making it easy. You folks can be hard to help. When we say 
`yes' and you say, "There they go again, saying, 'no'!" the situation worsens. If you condition 
your public and parliament to interpret what happens later this year as a disaster and a defeat 
and a humiliation for Russia, then you'll get precisely that. We are working with Foreign 
Minister Primakov to re-cast the Russia-NATO dialogue so that it doesn't sound like a hopeless 
impasse or a shouting match or a back-and-forth of ultimatums. We want to give you the 
evidence that you can use to show how Russian interests will be protected under the terms of 
the agreement with NATO. Both the Vice President and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin are 
authorized to negotiate on this issue by the two presidents. We have seen public polling that 
indicates that Ivan Ivanov and Anna Petrovna are not obsessed about NATO enlargement so 
much as about whether they are going to get their salaries and their pensions. 
The Vice President and Prime Minister are going to talk about these issues in Washington next 
month. Let me ask Leon to provide the Vice President's perspective. 
Fuerth: The Vice President understands political survival. He listened closely to the Prime 
Minister when they were together in Lisbon. The Vice President is thinking hard about how to 
handle the issue. Our objective is to insure the survival of our friends in office. 
Chubais: The question of timing is still unclear to me. Who created the deadline of 1997? 
Why do we have to have enlargement now? I understand the basic interests of the U.S., 
Europe and Russia. The key is security. Will NATO enlargement make Polish life more 
secure? No. It cannot and will not allow a new NATO-Russia relationship. It will make 
Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovenia and Bulgaria [sic] less secure. It's absolutely 
clear that it will create conditions of potential instability. Who is the enemy? Belarus? 
id 0-- e -H4h i 6- 
II) 14-t I eck, s4i); I ) \  ,‘ I I]UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
5

[Page 6]
CO 6 7 0 3 6 9 8:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
Ukraine? That's not serious. The only credible enemy is Russia. If NATO enlargement goes 
through, the only result of the end of Communism, of all our efforts these past years, will be 
moving the dividing line from Berlin to the border of Russia. This will lead to a strong 
reaction. You said that Russian public opinion is not upset. Well you are right for now. The 
reason is that the level of understanding today is not sharp. But what about in March, in April, 
in May when Zhirinovskiy and Zyuganov will exploit NATO enlargement for political 
purposes? You don't see a potential problem in Russia? The Russia public could be easily 
united against an external enemy. Politicians could rally the Russian people behind the great 
goal of defending themselves against an external enemy. This could be politically very 
profitable. I am concerned that the Communists and Zhirinovsky will exploit it. NATO 
enlargement will change the political landscape. It will raise real doubts about joining the 
WTO, Paris Club or other organizations or using American assistance or moving ahead on 
other economic reforms. The political steel claw of anti-westernism is open. 
Inevitably, this anti-Westernism will be embraced not jUst by the communists but by the 
existing power structure. We still have a military industrial complex. People will say, let's 
now give the military more money. Seventy percent of the people will support-such a call. 
This will change Russia politically. _ _ 
You need criteria for answering the questions that you raised, you need to correctly define the 
scale of the problem. It is an extraordinary problem- that needs an extraordinary response. It 
needs a very strong response, otherwise things will .change.for the worse.. 
Talbott: That is well said. We are working so that, within the coming months, we will 
transform the relationship between NATO and Russia-J.-We-need to accelerate--the- change-and ----- ------- - — 
highlight signs of that change. We need to put this, in stark,relief 7 We agree on the need to• 
address key questions. = = =1 - 
You express puzzlement about who is the new enemy'. NATO faced —.belatedly -to be sure 
a new threat to European security in Bosnia. We worked effectively militarily there, and 'we 
did so with others, particularly Russia, at our side;5•The Supreme Allied Commander in Europe 
is now on a first name basis, as it were, na ty [using the second-person-familiar], with General 
Shevtsov. 
• o. , • 
We want to develop this cooperation. We are prepared to go further in NATO, to revise 
NATO's strategic concept, to consult on the question of nucleardoctrine; to clarify and give 7 
higher visibility to the three no's on nuclear weapons,on the territory of new members. We are 
prepared to open up NATO's intemal adaptation to Russian participation in Combined Joint 
Task Forces. In our discussion today with Yevgeniy Maksimovich [Primakov], we talked 
about a NATO-Russia mechanism that would initially provide-consultations but later could 
provide for joint decision-making and joint action. - 
You mention the voices in your public debate against NATO enlargement, saying it will be a 
disaster. Well, Boris yeltsin, Viktor Chernomyrdin, and Yevgeniy Primakov are also voices. 
If they add their voices to the current chorus that is so vocal against NATO, you'll get your 
- 
6 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 7]
C 0 6 7 0 3 69 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
disaster. You'll have a self-fulfilling prophecy. We are trying to provide the basis for Russian 
leaders to respond more positively — to tell Zhirinovskiy and Zyuganov that they are wrong. 
We are trying to agree on a document to which Russian leaders can point as evidence that 
Russia now has greater cooperation with NATO. 
But as the American popular expression has it, "it takes two to tango." The trouble we have 
had is getting you on the dance floor. The good news from this visit is that I feel we are 
getting somewhere. Now we're beginning to collaborate on possible choreography for the 
spring. 
Chubais: I agree on Bosnia. It's a good example of cooperation. We really had the potential 
for designing a new NATO-Russia relationship before 1996.-But,-after-the announcement of- - —.—
NATO enlargement, we won't be able to get our parliament-to,agreelo.NATO,Russian' 
cooperation. We have a chance to design a step-by-step process or it will all be destroyed. 
You said we have three to four months. Yes, thatIssight;:butRussianS--have accepted already 
that the decision was made to expand NATO. Only_now:areyou thinking-about Russiat7You-71--
think maybe you can resolve the problems but if no4-toohadr - — 
reply or NATO enlargement will go ahead anywaÿ lulowthesome=of the'kersupporters 
driving the decision on NATO enlargement are Brzezinski and Kissinger who still don't 
understand that Russia has changed. 
Talbott: Time out. You don't have to accept my attetpt topersuadellowowthe,WisdOm vii ' 
our decision, but I hope at least you'll accept my explanation of how he reached that decision. 
I know who had an influence on him. The President:made upshis own-nind, OnAhehasis bflis '-
own convictions and vision. And by the way, helstened-vefy cakfully2first-to-theiadirice-ofAl-.--fr_ 
Gore, who, as you know, has his own clear ideas AhOut:the importante:ofsupportingauSsian,iil 11,1, kLlit 
reform and integration. I wouldn't exaggerate theinfluene-pf!others:,_You might want to read 
Henry Kissinger's latest article in Newsweek, in which he criticizes us, in effect, for paying too 
much attention to Russia. Yoi pt,,tio;;init -Alumi iN tilemt., NA IT, 
Å. 4-.T.rr,pili":711 
But let me come back to where our interests coincide. .(If‘l.ve,wOrk together4veistandsalchanceo- Nide. 
of working through these problems and getting it rightover thenext,few -months:, ILeon7 
'Fuerth: At the beginning of this enlargement process, I thought a lot about the question you 
asked. "Are we (Russia) the intended next enemy?..`tIf-not whatis the Ainericanintentiofir Li. 
Let me go back to the question of what is the goal;,the purpose,-of military force-in,Europelif ti'tt 
there is no "next enemy". came to the conclusion:that we:needed a',structurelike,NATG-after---. 
the Cold War. It helps America engage in Europe:riEveryltime.:we AnieriCans pulled ont ftif:*viD ill it-. hv--14711.:-.
Europe the results were not good. We have to aniweiz theineeds;of NATO memberrin 
disciplined system that requires collective decisions'foraction;(thoughllie- threshold for action.i ;; 
is high). Once this was agreed, this left open decisions-tor-the-existing-boundaries'of NATO - 
and new members of NATO. It seemed better that some should come into the system rather 
than be kept out. Now we are dealing with an imperfect world. I remember the decision about 
admitting Spain to NATO in the 1970's. One of the key arguments was that it would bring the 
Spanish army into a broader Western military culture. That decision worked out. 
7 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 8]
C 0 6 7 0 36 9 8 =I ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
c-
What bothers me today is whether there is a correct understanding in Russia of what NATO 
really is, what NATO has become after the Cold War and the collapse of the Warsaw Pact. 
President Kennedy said we have to think past stereotypes. I think NATO is stereotyped here in 
Russia. But now NATO is totally transformed. This is not fully understood here. Very 
profound changes have occurred in NATO. It is not designed today to point the sword. 
NATO contains military forces, but it has decided to perform specific tasks only upon the 
decision of all its members. That is the only way military elements in NATO are likely to be 
used. 
Lodal: Let me add a point. The use of military force in the contemporary world will require 
military coalitions. One of the reasons NATO continues today is that it has existing 
mechanisms to expedite the formation and deployment of military forces. Whether-the next _ 
threat is in the Gulf or elsewhere, it is better to have a-military alliance-system than to try to - -
form an alliance on an ad hoc basis. Moreover, the CJTF concept is designed to bring Russia-
in, without a specific threat. 
Fuerth: We know this is a tough issue and that your leadership-will have -to-address these-key ---
questions before your public. The Vice President anderstands=that: -We are-not there. yetwith,,, 
an answer, with which your leadership can face the cameras and explain the NATO-Russian 
relationship, but we are trying to open up opportunities for coordination and joint action. 
Talbott: That's key: we need something concrete.- -As Leon and -Jan make-clear; lve realize that 
we need to deal with the problem we face with more than abstractionsv,We_needconcrete =-
cooperation now. But I repeat: it takes two to tango— We are_trying-tO develop in-two months 
a framework for our two presidents so that your leadership can point in detail-to:a positive 
Russian-NATO connection, one that's good for Russia asmell as for Us and our Allies. , 
It will take years to implement these agreements. It7s going .to be one-and-a-half or two years 
after Madrid before the initial new members of NATO are actually admitted. During that 
period we can make good on the NATO-Russia relationship. 
4,1 ,f tq 111K xJ, 
Chubais: But psychologically the decision will be made in July. That will be a turning point. 
When you name the countries who will be the new members of,NATO;_that mill be enough to 
upset and frighten and anger the Russian people. 
Lodal: I take issue with your assertion that there isan offensive military threat against Russia: 
Chubais: I'm talking about psychology here, about perceptions, about stereotypes that don't 
disappear overnight. The problem is to have something behind the agreement.- We need 
something positive for the government to say about NATO-Russia. In the past, authority in 
Russia was attacked from an anti-Western position. That is the reason why it is hard for the 
government to argue now that the Russian people should not worry about NATO expansion. I 
am also concerned that the argument will not be accepted at all. 
; 
S. 4% - 
8 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 9]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 9 8 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
Talbott: We are trying to provide points for President Yeltsin to use in saying that NATO and 
Russia have agreed on steps that will be good for Russia. We are trying to develop a package of 
steps which can be announced by our two leaders. For example, we will ask our negotiators to 
modernize the CFE Treaty. We want to give more visibility and force to assurances about no 
new nuclear weapons in Central Europe. That's what we are hoping to develop. But we have 
to have a positive approach by you. Up until this week, every time we make a proposal, your 
side says either, "That's not good enough," or, "You're trying to humiliate us!" In the last 
couple of days, my colleagues and I feel we've finally begun to get some traction on the issue 
in our discussions with your people. But we've got a long way to go and not much time. 
Chubais: This all sounds very pragmatic, very reasonable, but franldy, I am worried that it's 
not enough. 
Talbott: What do you suggest? 
• 
Chubais: It can't just be a statement. We need an agreement, a treaty that will be accepted by 
parliament. We can't do this by mid-1997. In the most optimistic situation, we will not have 
an agreement. We need an agreement signed but not ratified by mid-1997. 
Talbott: We have just spent over an hour and a half discussing this issue with Yevgeniy 
Maksimovich [Primakov]. He started by insisting on a legally binding document. I hope you 
will be able to see the memorandum of that conversation or a protocol from our meeting. We 
are looking for a major political commitment by the Presidents of the United States and-Russia. 
This doesn't require submission of a document to the Congress or Duma. There-areprecedents 
for this. Let me give you an example: today U.S.-Chinese relations are dictated by three 
communiqués, the Shanghai communiqué and two others. ••These were never .ratified by the 
U.S. Senate. There is also the CSCE Helsinki Final Act, which is 23-years,old and had a lot to 
do with the changes for the better that have taken place in Russia and in Europe over that 
period. 
Chubais: Okay. I understand. We also need to discuss the issues-saised_by Gorbachev and - 
Matlock about the assurances provided by the Western countries — the promise not to expand 
NATO eastward. This is why we need the agreementnow to-be as binding, as "obligatoryr 
possible. 
Talbott: Look, Anatoly Borisovich. I'm familiar with Professor Matlock's version of what 
happened six or seven years ago and how to interpret the diplomatic record_ Tye written about - 
that episode myself. The United States Government has a different view of how to interpret the 
record. In any event, it's not really relevant. First, what was at issue there was leftover 
business from World War II and the Four Power Agreement on Berlin. Second, what • 
transpired among Gorbachev and Shevardnadze and Baker and the others was a confidential 
diplomatic exchange. What we're talking about is something quite different: a carefully 
formulated, meticulously negotiated, very public statement signed at the highest level of our 
government and unveiled in front of God and everybody. So let's not get hung up on questions 
of form. There's also the question of substance, which we're working on here in the context of 
9 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 10]
C 0 6 7 0 36  9 8 :IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
CFE, etc. And then there's the question of salesmanship, of explaining and presenting what we 
achieve in the most effective way we can. 
Fuerth: I live in both the world of foreign affairs and politics. I try to help the Vice President 
use simple words to explain complex foreign policy issues. I recognize that you have the 
immense challenge of interpreting to the Russian people the product, the NATO-Russian 
agreement. You need to have a strategy to sell that product. You need a document that speaks 
eloquently to the issue. 
Chubais: My concern is that even this agreement will not be enough. 
Fuerth: You say that you're going to take a hit no matter what we do. Right? 
Chubais: What's a hit? 
Talbott: Damage. You will suffer political damage. 
Chubais: Yes. The more comprehensive the agreement-, the less damage you will suffer. 
Collins: What are the one or two key things we have to -do that will help you answer the 
Russian public? What are the key elements at the emotional core-of-this-issue?-
o 7..6.1•14.":1; 
Chubais: It would be easy to answer that if we didn't have-all-thelistory of NATO - 
enlargement so far. Fundamentally, it would be a-decision-to let-Russia be a member-of . 
NATO, but we are already limited by the decision on new members: In July,. --
announce the new members and we will be forcedto, sell thatto the public. a I recognizethat 
NATO is now not as it was before. We need to convince peoplethat it's changed.. -We have to 
convince them that Russia is developing a normal, natural relationship with NATO; eveti if -
that's not completely true. We need more evidence to show. 
Talbott: We need to come up with such evidence: • 11 -1.1 , s 
r . a 317 to Oti,O1 
Now, Anatoly Borisovich, let me make a blunt appeal,— let orne,enlist yoti-in, our common 
cause. You and we have hard decisions to make on our bottom lines, on the substance of the 
NATO-Russia deal. Some of our colleagues will be tempted to engage in nickel and dime 
negotiations, to haggle over details as though we were buying a rug in Tashkent or sinneplade. 
What we need is a new spirit, a shared sense of urgency,- a willingness to go straight to our - ..... 
bottom lines. Otherwise we can't reach closure in time.- We are making this point both in 
Washington and in Brussels, but you need to make the same point here in-Moscow. 
Let me give you a couple of examples of arguments -to use, Javier Solana came here Monday 
and brought an unprecedented plan, a proposed mechanism which will bring Russia into 
consultation with NATO and could eventually lead to joint decision-making and joint action. 
What do we get from your side? A counter proposal that would put Russia in the middle of 
NATO's handling of a conflict between Greece and Turkey. If we were so stupid as to take 
10 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 11]
CO 6 7 0 3 6 9 87IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
this counter-proposal seriously, it would bring our own decision-making process in NATO to a 
halt. Our colleagues and Allies would think a) we'd lost our minds, and b) Russia was treating 
this issue as an opportunity to make mischief in NATO. Let me ask Mr. Lodal if he agrees 
with that rather harsh comment. 
Lodal: I think you've understated it. As it is, we're going to have to report the Russian 
counter-proposal, and it's going to cause questions if not problems. 
Talbott: The point is, Anatoly Borisovich, we can't let the best become the enemy of the good. 
This doesn't mean in the future we can't improve on our proposed agreement, or that we can't 
put flesh on the skeleton we are assembling. You will hear more about specifics. I'm just 
asking you to use your influence with the President to make sure that when issues come to his 
desk for decision, he takes account of the approach we're laying out to you here. 
Chubais: I doubt that the Russia-NATO agreement will be welcomed by everyone inside the 
Russian government. Some higher-level bureaucrats .think that it would-not be bad to have no 
agreement at all. Some oppose reform and prefer a Soviet-style response. This is also a 
problem for us. • 
Talbott: Point taken. I trust those voices won't prevail. May Lsee you alone for-a moment?--
In the one-on-one, Chubais made the following points: 
• Lebed has been somewhat milder, or more ambiValent, about enlargement in part because.
— as far and away the most popular politician in Russia — he-can-afford.to be-relaxed on -the= - 
subject. 14.J. &.--%•k i • i -i •
N I .2T 
• Yeltsin's health is " slowly" improving; he'd been-- tol&d office the. day befOre' and 
r *4 
here Chubais literally knocked on wood — he shotild be up for schrie4ilibliC-appearanCes-kion, • 
and he should be well enough to meet with President Clinton in March. 
• Echoing what we'd heard earlier from Mamedov, Chubais raised the possibility of holding 
the presidential meeting outside the United States.:-•=:ST piessedion'whether ithis- was for 'reasMis—
of health or political appearances (avoiding two trips.to the u.s:iifthepre-MadrictstAson)':, '"'!' • 
Chubais indicated it was more the latter than the fõfiter.- ST preSsed very hard for holding'the' 4-r 
meeting in the U.S., stressing that Yeltsin had agreed to-dolo in'his'-plione conversation' 
POTUS. Chubais said he understood what had transpired over the telephone.but hoped- that--
POTUS and his advisers would consider the acutedifficulties YeltSin-faces and coi8ider an 
alternative venue (Mamedov, in a separate conveltation; saidit'would help-Yeltsin politically if"--=`' 
the meeting were held in Canada — "anywhere but on American soil, even if it's in an 
American time zone." 
t 
i•L. 
• Chubais raised the issue of the Big Five meeting in Paris, as proposed by Kohl and Chirac. 
He said that this event could be instrumental to Yeltsin's enlargement-damage-limitation 
11 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 12]
CO 6 7 0 36 9 8=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019 
strategy. ST reviewed American doubts, concerns, reservations, adding that if there were to 
remain any possibility whatsoever of POTUS's going to Europe for such a meeting, it would be 
all the more important to stay with the presidentially agreed venue and timing of the March 
meeting. Chubais said he took the point, but added, "You're asking us to make some very, 
very difficult decisions for the sake of avoiding a train wreck, so don't be surprised if we ask 
you to make a few too — especially if they're in the area of procedure and protocol." 
• He asked rather pointedly about Primakov's handling of the week's talks, suggesting 
something other than total confidence, at least on his own part, in the FM's management of 
Topic A. ST answered (carefully) that the session he'd had with Primakov the day before was 
"better than most of the previous ones, although there are still some issues on which our sides 
remain far apart, particularly this issue of 'legally binding,' which has the potential to be a 
deal-breaker. Yevegeny Maximovich seems particularly hung up on it. Secretary Albright 
knows Primakov quite well and is prepared to deal with him, starting in about three weeks." 
_ - 
• Chubais asked that ST remain available as a direct channel and be prepared to return to 
Moscow on short notice. ST agreed. 
7 -11 .111 Ati.elit" .4 
:  ' 
12 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703698 Date: 08/26/2019