[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 7 20 3 73IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06772037 Date: 06/16/2021 
NODIS DECAPTIONED 
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior 
Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 1/9/2020 
Participants: Viktor Chernomyrdin, Russian Special Envoy 
for a Kosovo Peace Settlement 
Ambassador Collins 
Date/Location: May 17, 1999; Chernomyrdin's Office 
Subject: Talbott/Chernomyrdin/Ahtisaari Meeting in 
Helsinki May 18; Kosovo Situation 
Summary. The Ambassador said Deputy Secretary Talbott 
had received support from the President, Vice President, 
and Secretary, as well as from Kofi Annan and NATO Allies, 
for the approach he and Chernomyrdin had discussed last 
week in Moscow. Chernomyrdin asked whether Annan had yet 
received a UN appointment; the Ambassador said no such 
formal appointment had been made, but Annan is ready to 
work with and support Ahtisaari. Chernomyrdin provided no 
details of his discussions last week with Ahtisaari, saying 
only that they were "ok." With regard to news from 
Belgrade, Chernomyrdin said Moscow was picking up no signs 
Milosevic would surrender, although he may be ready to 
negotiate. He also is preparing for a NATO ground 
invasion. Chernomyrdin said the peace process now seemed 
to be going in circles, with no new ideas or approaches. 
Russia was close to giving up. The Ambassador said the 
U.S. believed we had made some progress and had to continue 
the process. Chernomyrdin said he would go to Belgrade no 
matter what came out of the Helsinki meeting, but was not 
.sure whether he would go directly from Helsinki or first 
return to Moscow. At the end of the discussion, he said 
Russia's position had not changed. He remained engaged and 
would do all that he could. He hoped for progress in 
Helsinki. Thus far we had concentrated on finding common 
ground between NATO and Russia, but we would also need to 
find common ground with Milosevic. End Summary.
The Ambassador said that Deputy Secretary Talbott had 
asked him to express appreciation for the meetings in 
Moscow last week. Talbott was looking forward to the 
meeting with Chernomyrdin and Ahtisaari toinorrow in 
Helsinki. He had reported to the President, Vice' 
President, and Secretary on his meetings with Chernomyrdin, 
and they had supported the ideas that Talbott had discussed 
with Chernomyrdin last week. Talbott would provide further 
details in H6lsinki. Talbott had also had positive 
resonance from Kofi Annan when they met in Geneva. 
SECRET UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06772037 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 7 7 2 0 3 7 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06772037 Date: 06/16/2021 
-SECRET 
-2-
Chernomyrdin expressed satisfaction that Annan supported 
the approach under discussion, but asked immediately' 
whether Annan had yet formally appointed Ahtisaari for a UN 
role. The Ambassador said that, so far as he knew, there 
had not yet been a formal appointment, but Annan was 
supportive of Ahtisaari's role. 
Chernomyrdin asked whether Talbott would be bringing 
to Helsinki the position they had discussed last week, and 
said he hoped there would be no essential changes. The 
Ambassador said the U.S. position would be within that 
framework; the details he and Talbott had discussed were 
being worked on in Washington over the weekend, and the 
discussion would continue until Talbott's departure tonight 
for Helsinki. Chernomyrdin asked where Talbott would go 
after Helsinki; the Ambassador said Talbott plans to be in 
Europe and might brief the G-8 Political Directors meeting 
in Bonn on Wednesday. Chernomyrdin asked the•Russian side 
who would represent Russia at that meeting; Ivanovskiy said 
that Mayorskiy would be there. 
The Ambassador asked what Chernomyrdin could share on 
his meeting with Ahtisaari. Chernomyrdin gave no details, 
saying only that the meeting was "ok" ("normalna"). He and 
Ahtisaari exchanged views, but it was clear that Ahtisaari . 
was only beginning to understand the issue and had not yet 
established a firm grasp of the details. Ahtisaari of 
course accepted the G-8 principles for a settlement ("no 
one" was against the principles, Chernomyrdin said, "not 
even Milosevic"). Chernomyrdin summarized his meeting with 
Ahtisaari by again saying that it was "ok." 
The Ambassador asked if there was any news from 
Belgrade. Chernomyrdin said the news was not very good, 
and referred to the NATO attack that kilied 80-100 
civilians. On the issue of reaching a settlement, he said 
it did not make sense to expect Milosevic to surrender; he 
was not that kind of person. Milosevic knew NATO's plans 
and determination, but Russia was picking up no messages or 
signals indicating that MilOsevic was "nervous." He had 
stopped his announced withdrawal of forces from Kosovo as 
of Sunday. 
Chernomyrdin continued that Russia saw the peace 
process dragging on with little progress being made. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06772037 Date: 06/16/2021

[Page 3]
C 06 7 7 2 0 3 7 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06772037 Date: 06/16/2021 
-3--
Perhaps some headway was made when Talbott visited Moscow. 
There needed to be further work done on the principles that 
had been discussed then. He was sure Talbott would be in 
Helsinki with a clear position, but wš could not count on 
Milosevic siznply giving up. That at least was Russia's 
reading, but Milosevic was a complicated person. 
The Ambassador asked whether there was any message he 
should convey to Talbott. Chernomyrdin said there was not. 
He continued, however, that the process had reached a point 
where Russia was close to giving up. We were going in 
circles/ there were no new approaches or ideas. NATO was 
holding to a very firm policy line.and the airstrikes were 
continuing unabated, but Milosevic was'showing no sign of 
changing his position. He was instead preparing himself 
for a NATO ground invasion, since NATO could not win by 
airstrikes alone. The situation was bleak. 
Chernomyrdin said that he would be going to Belgrade 
after Helsinki, no matter what the outcome of the Tuesday 
discussions. The Ambassador asked if he intended to go 
immediately after the meeting in Helsinki. Chernomyrdin 
said, "We'll see:" He would go to Belgrade either from 
Helsinki or return first briefly to Moscow. 
The Ambassador said that, as Secretary Albright had 
told FM Ivanov in their telephone conversation last night, 
the U.S. thought we had made progress in our joint efforts 
and believed they must continui3. He hoped Russia would 
stay engaged and keep working. He knew that Washington was 
well aware of the frustrations Moscow felt in the process, 
and that was why Talbott and other U.S. officials were 
looking for approaches that would open up possibilities for 
Joint progress. That was the spirit in which Talbott would 
be going to Helsinki. 
Chernomyrdin concluded the meeting saying that Russia 
had not changed its position. He remained engaged and 
would do all that he could. Further steps were needed. We 
were working on finding common ground between us,- but we 
would need to find some with Milosevic as well. He felt 
that Russia had thus far made more progress with Milosevic 
than in dealing with the NATO countries. We needed to 
continue our efforts and get down to business. 
"cazas 
Ltan 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06772037 Date: 06/16/2021