[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 2 6=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019 
Mar!gh 15, 1997-
Calablg;P44./NODIS 
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
Date/Time: March 15, 1997; 4:45-5:40 pm 
Place: D Conference Room 
Participants: 
U.S. 
DECAPTIONED 
Secretary Albright 
Deputy Secretary Talbott 
Undersecretary Davis 
DOD Prin'l D'ty U/S Lodal 
Ambassador Collins 
A/S Kornblum 
Jamie Rubin, S 
Robert Bell, NSC 
Sandy Vershbow, NSC 
Steve Pifer, NSC 
Michael Nacht, ACDA 
LtGen Myers 
Jim Timbie, T 
Eric Edelman, D 
John Herbst, S/NIS 
Ki Fort, NSC 
Peter Afanasenko (Interpreter) 
Thomas Lynch, EUR/RUS (Notetaker) 
Russia 
[RELEASE IN FULL] 
DECLASSIFIED 
Foreign Minister Primakov 
DFM Mamedov 
DFM Afanasyevskiy 
Ambassador Vorontsov 
Special Assistant Markaryan 
Spokesman Tarasov 
Arms Control Director Kislyak 
N. America Director Spasskiy 
Eur. Regional Director Belous 
DCM Chkikvishvili 
Gen-Co1 Zlenko 
Gen-Maj Mazurkevitch 
Andrey Groshev, interpreter 
The Secretary noted that scheduling had originally provided for 
two meetings: one on the NATO/Russia Charter and European 
security issues, and the second on arms control issues 
including START-II, START-III, and ABM. However, given the 
time available (note: the meeting began 85 minutes after the 
scheduled time) we now proposed to concentrate on the - 
NATO/Russia Charter. Depending on other scheduling, the 
Secretary suggested a meeting Sunday on START issues. - 
Primakov assented, but urged that the scope of the present 
meeting not be limited. He and his team had come in order to 
produce the maximum possible results. Their interest was a 
positive result for Helsinki. He and his team were committed 
to doing their best to achieve that result. He suggested 
starting with the Charter. 
Primakov continued that in his view, the Charter should not be 
among the documents signed at Helsinki. Doing that would 
create irritations for other NATO members which would think 
that the U.S. and Russia had t011uded. However, the basic 
provision, of the Charter could be in a joint statement by the 
Presidents. That would provide good guidance for others. 
-elitTillottf"flIthr/NODIS 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
6/17/2019 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 7 0 3 62 6 =I ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019 
—cryTTE-TvErrilsiNcuu.a 
-2-
Primakov noted that on four elements of the draft Charter --
preamble, principles, mechanism for cooperation and 
consultation, areas for consultation and cooperation -- the 
U.S. and Russian positions are close. We agree on practically 
all points. However, regarding the military elements, we need 
to resolve one question or there can be no document. Primakov 
said the Russians had studied what was proposed by Solana. 
"You did that on purpose before I came here_ What's done is 
done. However, this formula is totally unacceptable to us." 
The main thing, Primakov said, is that no infrastructure, 
nuclear, or conventional forces be moved toward Russia's 
borders. "We want you to resolve the issue of guarantees to 
the new members." Norway and Denmark, he said, have NATO 
guarantees but no NATO bases. This, he claimed, showed that 
the issue of guarantees is separate from the issue of 
infrastructure. 
Primakov noted that NATO wants to draw the new members into 
exercises for peacekeeping. As he saw it, there is no.question 
of excluding foreign forces from the territory of the new 
members -- the problem is that they should not be stationed 
permanently. If stationing is only for a short time, Russia 
could agree. Primakov suggested a Helsinki statement by the 
Presidents: "the first preparation4 for a NATO-Russia document 
are under way. The Presidents welcomed-those preparations. 
The document will be signed by the mos-e senior leaders, thus 
making it binding." (Primakov commented that he_preferred to 
avoid the word "'legal,'" and stick tt "binding:'")-Primakov 
said his side would be obliged to put the document before the 
Duma. Whether the document is put before Congress is a 
question for the U.S. side. For the Russians, Presidential 
signature "settles the matter." PrimakOV-said that-the.1-
document should include nuclear language: .he had agreed on 
that with Solana. "We understand == arid I Stress this fdt you, 
Strobe -- your difficulties about infrastructure, and the' 
problem of meshing the concept with the-d6tailst SO-We offer-a 
variant." - -. - - 
Primakov read the following sentenee:L--
"Countries of NATO state that they''-will-nbt'StAtion ot make--
preparations for stationing nuclearf.F-Weapons onthe tettitorY-of' 
state where there were none as of Januaty - _ 
Primakov also sought a statement that---"NATO'conVentional forces 
and armaments would not be stationed-permanently beyond the 
territories of the Alliance's present members. At the same 
time, no military infrastructure will be established or-
developed beyond these territories tO support th-e Stationing or 
operational deployment of attack force groupS of NATO,"-
Primakov suggested that the statement could also specifically 
exempt trQops stationed for conducting peacekeeping operations 
-71eIrt5ENAT.4NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 70 36 26 IFIED U.S. Departrnent of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019 
-geN-F-1-9€41-T-4441.,LNQDI' 
-3-
and exercises. The .issue of no permanent stationing, Primakov 
said, "is a sine qua non for us." He suggested that the format 
for the Helsinki statement remains to be decided. 
The Secretary said it was important to come to basic decisions 
on issues Primakov had raised. We don't disagree that the 
Charter should not be unveiled until all have agreed to it. 
The Charter could be brought out at a meeting of Heads of 
State. We agree that a solid bilateral statement on European 
security is needed at Helsinki. We appreciate receiving the 
Russian draft, which we will look at and discuss tomorrow. 
The Secretary continued that the problem is that the "no's" in 
Solana's statement are not negotiable. What he announced 
reptesents fixed policies of NATO. It was-important—that 
Primakov be more fully aware of what the statement really 
means. Earlier, the Secretary said, Primakov had seen the 
"three 'no's."' She hoped that at the.Pentagon on Sunday, when 
Ptimakov saw what NATO policies, -deployments,-and plans really 
are, he would find them non-threatening. Primakov had talked : 
about stationing of conventional forces in the new NATO
countries. Our statement says "where-not now deployed"; the 
Russian statement says "beyond the territories of the present. 
members." What was the real difference? 
Primakov said his variant was based on...serious consideration, 
not silly ideas. He could not present :to the Duma a formula 
other than the one he had suggested. Earlier, on the Russian 
side, a more restrictive variant had been_dscussed that he had 
opposed. It would have prohibited any force transfers between 
current members of NATO. 
The Secretary asked to restate basics,- .As we, taljc_about.NATO_„ 
enlargement, we refer to NATO taking ,in-new members as part of, 
building a new security system to remove instabilities.. in 
Central and Eastern Europe -- instabilities2that :have 
threatened Russia along with everyone„ .else. Our undertaking 
has other basic principles, including that there be no 
second-class membership. 
Primakov countered that there are two--classes.of NATO -., , 
membership. Germany is in the second :cla,s,s,:yThe_Secretary 
said that details of membership were matters of:sovereign
decisions. Primakov responded that Norway and Denmark had 
taken their decisions as a matter of self-restraint. : ,Germapy 
took its decision because it was imposed b.y_the 2+4. Kinkel 
had told him so. 
The Secretary repeated that NATO has pledged to having no 
second-class citizens. New members do_not_want_to_feel that 
their rights are limited. It is important also that NATO 
members ,make the decisions for the Alliance. Solana's 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 4]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 2 6 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019 
—777FTItEWS4AL.4NODIS 
-4-
statement is NATO policy. It is inappropriate for non-members 
of NATO to restrict NATO's policies. The U.S. is not going to 
bargain away the position of existing and new members in order 
to bring Russia into the new system, even as we want Russia in 
the new system. 
Primakov responded that we have under discussion a document 
detailing the special relationship between Russia and NATO, 
including how Russia and NATO can jointly consult, decide, and 
act. In putting forward those concepts, Primakov said, the 
U.S. side signified its acceptance that Russia affects NATO. 
If you deny that, he said, there is no point in signing any 
document. He suggested three hypothetical future scenarios: 
That NATO would freeze the process of taking in new members. 
Primakov commented that would not happen,_ 
That Russia and NATO would sign an agreement,that would 
eliminate or allay Russian concérns., "We are working 
on that." 
-- "That if you enlarge without paying attpntionto Russia,____ 
our relations Will experience a serious deterioration." 
A NATO-Russia document, Primakovsaid,.-is not popular in 
Russia. "Strobe's friends like Karaganov saythe Foreign 
Ministry wants to sign, but that R*S-Sia shouldn't sign because 
doing so will weaken Russian domestic opposition to NATO." So, 
Primakov said, he wanted to stick to the second.scenaric, 
The Secretary said she agreed with Primakov's hypothetical 
scenarios. We appreciate also his understanding that we won't 
freeze enlargement. Frankly, she said, We Can live withoUt the 
Charter because we are going forward.- We7want the Charterv„ 
because it will be a good road mapfOr-, Ruisia and NATOFoverthe 
next 50 years. The Secretary said tha-tRrimakay,was,trying.to _ 
get NATO to improve on positions set out in statements-thatT 
constitute NATO policy. She suggetedYinstead that we work 
together so that the Russian side cOuld urid-drstand f4hat NATO is 
actually saying. Much of what Primakoy had raised is, already 
in the Charter. 
However, the Secretary continued, there can be no flat 
prohibitions. It was wrong, she said, for Rrimakov to_think we 
paid "no attention" to Russian concerns. Hut there'are certain 
lines from which we cannot depart. How, then, could we find 
common ground? The Secretary sugge-stdd that since Primakov had 
said four sections of the Charter are basically agreed, we 
should concentrate on what we could agree dnd accept for the 
final section. We both want the Presiden-ts to achieVe a 
statement;that advances the interest of both countries. The 
_.C.041F-latErtiltAM/NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 5]
C 0 67 03 62 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019 
-5-
Secretary said that if Primakov faced a public reaction from 
the Charter, so did she. Some in the U.S. believe we are 
making concessions. Sook at the front page of the 3 /1 5 New 
York Times.  The Secretary said: "I don't like the word 
'concessions.' What we propose is a document which identifies 
the common good." New countries seeking NATO membership, the 
Secretary continued, are nervous that we are bargaining away 
their rights. The U.S. -- Bill Clinton as President, and she, 
as Secretary of State -- will not bargain away the rights of 
the Central European countries which will take their rightful 
place in NATO. Justice and history will not allow that. 
Primakov asked that the Secretary not make Russia bargain away 
its rights and its sovereignty. We need to work on the 
respective positions. The U.S. side had to understand that 
Russia has a role. Also, politics determine the limits of the 
possible. In that, he as Foreign Minister and she as Secretary 
of State were equal. 
Primakov joked that it would be "mutual fun" to read the 
drafts, even if Karaganov, Kokoshin and--others-were urging-that 
Russia nOt sign. Primakov urged that We-Should agree and the--
Presidents should sign a statement on-NATO/Russia, arms 
control, CW, economics -- a breakthrough that will define our 
relationship for many years. 
Mamedov said that experts' work is important. "Let the two 
friends -- Kornblum and Afanasyevskili ---get together.4' 
Primakov said that as the U.S. side wbrked orr the Russian 
draft, it would see that it is largely the U.S. draft: -He-
asked to move on to arms control isSues. 
Speaking in general terms, Primakov'Said thgt.Some=of the a7r,i-6-s-
control positions are closer than others. The Russian side= 
liked the U.S. statement on demarcation,- -It Wel:Corned-the - 
establishment of the 5.5 km/sec limit-fdrinterceptbrs -There 
is an agreement on moving to 2,000-;2-,I5DO:stretegic warheads 
In contrast to START-II, START-III WM prOvide'for "d-redliCtiOn 
of warheads. So there is convergenCe on a number-of pointS-.—
The Secretary asked U/S Davis to respond.i-
U/S Davis said we noted a number of'-polhts- of 'agreement in the 
paper Mamedov delivered. However, there are three areas where 
the Russian position would need to -change if we are to-gain 
agreement. = 
The Russian side wants to constrain TMD, which the US. 
cannot accept. The U.S. seeks to-proceed-on the basiS-of 
limits on testing parameters' and transparencY, building-on--
information about plans. 
The RliSsian side seeks to ban TMD faster than 5.5 kps. We 
cannot agree to a ban. 
-- The Russian side seeks to block our testing of new 
technologies. We cannot agree, but these are issues for 
the future. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State CWs- 
1 
e-RiO".-F- 617-Y3-80-4- Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 6]
C 0 67 03 62 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019 
-6-
In Moscow, we presented.an approach responding to the Russian 
concerns. It works from the basis of transparency rather than 
constraints. 
Primakov said we should get down to serious consultations and 
discuss whether developments violate the ABM treaty. The 
experts should meet. 
U/S Davis pointed out to the Secretary that experts are usually 
invoked at this point in the discussion. 
The Secretary proposed, and Primakov agreed, to meet again at 1 
pm Sunday, on the basis of working group meetings on European 
security and arms control. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 7]
C 0 6 7 0 3 6 2 6 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019 
SNISGEN 8925 
EUR/RUS:TLync 
EUR:JKornbl 
T:JTimbie 
S/NIS : JEH rbst 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703626 Date: 08/26/2019