[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 0 3 51 0 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703510 Date: 08/26/2019 
tteREGVNODIS 
- 1 - 
DECAPTIONED 
TALBOTT/CHUBAIS MEMCON 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
ST: I have a personal request. Steve Pifer represents the 
White House on our delegation. It is important that be attend 
the meeting with President Yeltsin and I wonder if you could help 
make that possible. 
C. I'll try. How is it going? 
ST: After meetings today with Prime Minister Chernomyrdin and 
Foreign Minister Primakov I'm deeply worried because it is going 
so well. I have a sense that our interlocutors have crossed a 
threshold. There are still lots of serious problems but Minister 
Primakov and Secretary Albright got to a new realm. 
I. think it is possible now to reach agreement on understandings 
and arrangements that would allow President Clinton and President 
Yeltsin to say in Helsinki that while continued differences 
remain, they have agreed that Russia and NATO need to work and to 
cooperate, and that the U.S. and Russia and NATO and Russia have 
reached certain concrete agreements. 
The problems that remain center around two elements of the 
broader issue. CFE and its relationship to enlargement, and the 
consultation mechanism. 
I have told our Public Affairs people we have to keep 
expectations low. If there are any breakthroughs, we w=il ave 
them for Helsinki. I've also thought a lot about the po .iTit'S you 
made the last time we met, particularly the political pailits.  We 
have looked carefully at the diplomatic calendar in light , ef what 
you had to say. For the record our position is that thd are 
only two meetings set at this point, Helsinki and MadriiTt -,_ 
However, I see you'have a safe over there in the corner. 0_ you 
use it. 
C. I've never opened it. 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior 
Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 6/17/2019 
ST. Well, let's suppose that that safe contains something 
very special; let's suppose it contains happiness. I want now to 
give you the combination to that safe (Here ST writes on a card 
2-5-17-8 and hands the card to a mystified Chubais who saYs he 
doesn't understand it. ST explains the symbolism and the numbers 
at meetings; then he continues.) The issue we face with meetings 
is like opening the safe. You have to get the numbers in the 
right sequence and they have to be successfully sited at each 
number. Our problem now is that we cannot get to five until we 
get to and through two. So far as the five is concerned, the 
problem has more to do with the Alliance than with the U.S.; 
President Clinton would go tomorrow. 
aBeR5a/NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703510 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 7 0 3 510 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703510 Date: 08/26/2019 
---sEcretvElaa— 2 --
So, our ideas are not new, but I have more hope after today. On 
the other hand, if tomorrow's meetings go badly, it could wreck 
everything. As of now, however, we will be going back to 
Washington to work. Primakov and Secretary Albright have 
instructed Yuriy Mamedov and me to go to work and we will; We 
will focus on(the issues of the mechanism and CFE. 
C. O.K. But Kinkel said Albright is opposed to the five. 
ST. There is no question that the twelve are a problem. 
Travel is a problem too, but only for President Clinton. But, 
for him the only issue is substance; we have to get the substance 
right. If we do, the form will be workable. 
C. Will Secretary Albright tell4Yeltsin what-you_have said 
about the five? - - - 
ST. She will say substance before-form. . 
C. I don't see a problem with the Eight,._ 
ST. Well, there has been a problem in the past. 
C. The problem we have is causety_enlargement. šRussia is-. =—
becoming divided from the west. Letstiherefore,find a'way-to 
compensate. There are some steps that we ,,can.:t-ake: -..,,transform -,the • 
G-7 to the G-8; irave Russia join theA4T0..._ 
change the situation. It will consolidat the'i_domeStic --
commitment to reform because of therWTOrrequi-rements:_regardingi. 
e.g., agricultural subsidies, tariffs. Because under our 
constitution a treaty is supreme law, it is insurance against the 
communists being able to challengereform -, Getting-Russla -intal 
the Paris Club is also fundamental.- -
Thus, I'm trying to find a number of. steps Twe --can7 -take -Ao counter 
the anti-western impulses that are being sparked by NATO 
enlargement. 
ST. We'll need to avoid any reference to:compensation. - We 
don't want to support the idea of a-bribe -or_payoft of.Russia. 
It would be disastrous to suggest or hint that you are buying 
into these institutions at the expense of Russia's security. 
Another point, we will not stop working at or after Madrid. We 
do not see Madrid as an end. We will continue to work for 
Russia's integration. 
-- gtrREg41112pIE 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703510 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 3]
C 0 6 7 0 3 51 OFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703510 Date: 08/26/2019 
--sEeRrTinopis 
- 3 - 
(At this point ST notes we have provided Chernomyrdin and 
Primakov a draft text of an economic statement for Helsinki and 
gives Chubais the text. Chubais scans it and comments.) 
C. I can't argue with anything; it's what I've just said. I 
do have a couple of comments. I would avoid using the number $4 
billion; numbers are a problem (the reference is to the past 
unhappy experience over the Tokyo announcement of $40 billion in 
assistance); I would also set a more ambitious deadline for 
Russian entry into WTO. Davydov just briefed me and suggested 
possibly the end of 1997; I also don't like the title. The 
economic statement should be put into a broader statement and 
context; the context should be cooperation with the broader world. 
Words are important here. We got into a great deal of 
controversy over a mistranslation of what ehernomyrdin_said;in 
Davos, for instance. He made reference in-his-remarks to the 
fact that Russia did not want a "formal'noe soglashenie" with 
NATO; this was translated to mean that Russia did not want a 
formal agreement. In fact, the phrase means we_do not want.:,a--
formalistic or non-substantive agreement. 
The critical question is what kind of Russia will exist after we 
are done: a western Russia or an anti-Western one. We need to 
work to ensure that it is a pro-West_ Russia.:
ST With respect to the issue_surrounding,the-G17.7,and-G-8,-
the Vice President provided the Prime Einister with-ta graphic.-to. r 
illustrate where we think we shoulci:try-ito.lheadHereSTAraws7,.. 
the Vice President's two circle graphic illustra-tingthe%moye --
from G-7 plus (pile to G-8 minus 
_-11, 
C. I think this is an issue forst-he presidentsAc-discussAny-
Helsinki. - 
ST. What Russia wants, needs and deserves,'is a seat on the 
Board of Directors for Europe. 
C. Yes. That is very important. 
Draft: 2/24 1000 
intffRBTJNODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06703510 Date: 08/26/2019