[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 70 99 21FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021 
MEMCON: TALBOTT-SINGH PRIVATE CONVERSATION 
JANUARY 30, 10:30 A.M. 
PARTICIPANTS: 
Deputy Secretary Talbott 
Foreign Minister Singh 
VCJCS General Ralston 
Ambassador Celeste 
Foreign Secretary Raghunath 
Indian Ambassador to Washington Chandra 
D Special Assistant deV illafranca 
RELEASE IN PART 
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D) 
FM Singh began the conversation by reading a proposed Indian statement, to be read at 
the forthcoming plenary session, on a fissile rnaterial moratorium. Singh explained that 
the language had been reviewed by the Prime Minister. After reading the statement, 
Singh noted that he had an important Parliamentary session coming up. What he said to 
the US side he would have to say to Parliamentarians. This was essential to keeping the 
Parliament "on board." Deputy Secretary Talbott replied that the Indian statement on a 
rnoratorium appeared to be a good faith effort given the need for prudence. The question 
was whether the difference between the Indian statement US expectations was 
rnanageable. He gave PM DAS Einhorn a copy of the proposed language, noting it 
appeared to be less specific than what we had hoped to see, and asked Einhorn to go over 
the language with his Indian counterparts and then share his assessment on whether there 
was enough in the statement to allow us to move forward. 
Talbott said that if Einhorn's answer was "no," he and Singh might want to concentrate 
on how the two sides could work together on managing disappointment. While the 
Indian statement was being assesSed, Talbott suggested, he and Singh might on a 
conditional basis begin to explore the "choreography" bf a series of interim steps each 
side could take to move closer to resolution. 
Singh asked about the timing of an understanding on fissile material moratorium: did 
Talbott mean in the April/May time frame? Talbott said yes. Singh said he could not 
emphasize enough the importance of the upcoming session. It would only be appropriate 
in the event the Parliament was "on board" with regard to CTBT and FMCT. With this in 
mind, the choreography of interim measures was up to the US. Singh recalled the 
difficulties he had encountered after having provided a response to the Deputy Secretary 
in a phone call in November. (NB: That call had been initiated by the Deputy Secretary to 
inform Singh of US decisions regarding pending US support for IMF loans to Pakistan.) 
1 4(B) 
1 4(D) 
B1 
Classified by Director A/GIS/IPS, DoS on 12/21/2020 — Class: CONFIDENTIAL — Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) 
— Declassify on: 12/21/2030 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 7 7 0 9 92=1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021 
f this US 
approach continued until May or June, it would make his task much more difficult. If he 
told Parliament that india needed to move in this direction, the response would be, "well, 
what's the US doing in return?" If he were to respond, "they're narrowing the entities 
list", it would not wash — he would not be able to sell it. Thus, Singh said, he was not in 
a position to work on the details of the choreography; the optics would be that the US had 
done nothing and India had. 
Talbott asked whether it would be constructive to table the road map (choreography of 
interim stepsyin the plenary if the Einhorn answer wa§ 'yes'. He understood Singh's 
views on calendar and the need for US front loading steps (IFI lending). It was his 
impression that the US approach did that through release of the Andra Pradesh loan, 
which would be a signal of US intent. The deferral of March loans could be done not too 
prejudicially. Under this scenario, we could be out of the woods by May/June. What he 
was suggesting was a simultaneity that met Singh's Parliamentary needs and would pre-
condition a favorable environment in the way the US handled the late February World 
Bank Loan (Andra Pradesh). It was not our expectation that you would say yes today, 
Talbott said, but by late February we could have a schedule figured out and you could 
take Parliamentary soundings. 
Singh said he would leave shortly for the Uk and then to Jamaica for G-15 meetings. 
Then came Indo-Pak talks and on Feb 22 the Parliament opening, with the President's 
address and presentation of the budget (on Feb. 27); this would be followed by debate on 
the budget, a week or so, then the Parliament would go to committees and work through 
the balance of March. Thus it would be early April before he could re-engage of this 
issue again. And this was precisely the period, Singh said, that he would need to sit down 
privately with key Parliamentarians and explain what he was doing. 
Talbott said he inferred from Singh response that Andra Pradesh would not help the 
process. Singh said it would help, but was only a signal. Talbott observed that the US 
side, too, was getting only signals, but was prepared to deal in this currency awhile. For 
example, the two things the US wanted on restraint were themselves tentative ones, not 
concrete, not "bankable:" On Fismat, Talbott said, we'll have a complex, emphemeral 
promissory statement. On CTBT, the Indian side was dis-aggregating the process into 
three parts, sign, ratify, deposit, and the US was asking now for only the first partmof the 
three. For now, both these steps would serve. In return, he had hoped the Indian side 
would be more tolerant of those aspects of the US position that were promissorial, but 
headed in the right direction. It was a question of how much the US could do with 
executive policy. Singh responded that he understood the US had certain restraints. On 
FMCT (sic), Singh said, the US had spoken only yesterday about using a future tense, in 
a CD forum, etc. But Einhorn's new paper ran counter to that conversation. 
  Talbott said that the ciitical piece in 
Einhorn's formulation was that India would need to do nothing on a gioratorium until 
B1 
1.4(D) 
1.4(B) 
1.4(B) 
1.4(D) 
B1 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 7 7 0 9 9 2IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021 
other states were prepared to do the same. Absent a willingness on the part of China and 
Pakistan, India would not have to make the statement. Conditionality is enshrined in the 
formulation. But, perhaps this still fell into the "too hard to do" category... 
Ambassador Chandra interrupted to observe that the Andra Pradesh loan would not 
generate much resonance in the Parliament. Talbott responded that it was regrettable that 
US sanctions made the US unable to support, but those sanctions arose over a core 
disagreement between the US and India over a matter that involves the strategic interests 
of the United States — and also of India. If the result of our efforts here was impasse over 
what the future will be like, especially of how India defines its security interests on 
nuclear weapons, then the US and India would be at odds for a long time. We strongly 
hoped this would not be the case. Nor did the US want to stand in the way of India's 
development. But the problem was that the Indian side kept driving the US toward de 
minimus gestures and self-abnegating statements on policy while at the same time 
working for maximal tangible gestures toward India. The US had bent over backward to 
develop the current set of suggestions for moving forward. What the US was asking for 
was not a maximum, but a minimum. We were saying, ok, dis-aggregate CTBT, but at 
least sign it in a time frame that allows us time for the MDB. The same of fismat, which 
was, again, conditional, yet sufficient to allow us to get some momentum. We were, 
Talbott said, right on the cusp of a "managing disappointment" scenario. Chandra backed 
off. Andra Pradesh was not a big deal, he said. He had meant only to suggest that it 
would not generate much room for momentum in the Parliament. Talbott replied that the 
US was talking about a down payment on concrete gestures in exchange for something 
less concrete from India. Under the US formula, India would sign the CTBT but not yet 
adhere, but the US would work with others to support the full range of MDB lending, i.e., 
a solid, real payoff for India. But apparently, that would not be good enough. Chandra 
replied that the US direction and goals were not contested, but that the position on 
Multilateral lending had been a drag on the government's efforts to make progress, and 
Andra Pradesh would not do much to alleviate those difficulties. 
Singh said that even if the choreography idea did not work out, India would still do what 
it had committed to do. The commitment at UNGA had been to the global community, 
and India would meet it. Also, while the Indian'government did not need Parliamentary 
approval for each step of the CTBT process, it was important to carry it along. The 
actual process involved three cabinet decisions. Jaswant Singh admitted he had hoped to 
get further along during the winter schedule but had been sidetracked by other issues. 
At this point, Einhorn returned to say that the US and India were on different 
wavelengths on the proposed Indian statement on a fissile material production 
moratoriurn, and it would be difficult to reconcile respective views. The Indian side's 
approach was much more heavily conditioned; among other issues such as clarity and 
progresS in the FMCT negotiations in the CD, there seemed to be a requirement for 
agreement on verification at the moratorium stage. The Indian formulation was that India 
would join a cumulative process aimed at achieving a moratorium, but believes that to 
proceed along the lines we had suggested would overload the political circuits. Einhorn 
said US experts had also briefed the Indian side on the US assessment of the fissile 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021

[Page 4]
C O 6 7 7 0 9 9 2>IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021 
material production ability of the three (India/Pakistan/China) countries, noting that 
Pakistan has a greater capacity over the next two years6than India. They can make great 
strides with both Plutonium and Uranium, while India remained locked into its existing 
capacity. ln out years India could move ahead, but for now, Pakistan can close the gap. 
China had stopped production. However, after the May tests China had considered how 
to react and chosen not to test in response. China would, however, now be wondering if 
they had enough fissile material after all. It would be advantageous to lock them in and 
c]ose the debate in China. Pakistan would have good reasons for resisting a moratorium, 
but it would be in India's interest to do it now. Rakesh Sood, Eihorn's counterpart, said it 
was not so much conditionality at play in the Indian perspective, but the need to link the 
Indian approach politically ,to what the Prime Minister had said in the Lok Sabha and at 
the UNGA. We don't see this, Sood continued, as the final word from India, but we need 
to generate public support. It it's negative on this idea, negative fallout on our CTI3T 
effort is possible...but it is conceivable that this is not the final word. 
When Einhorn and Sood had departed, Talbott said that their report rendered the roadmap 
(interim steps/choreography) "academic" a least for the time being, since the US did not 
have the first of the. three components. Unless India changed its approach, we would now 
need to concentrate on the managing disappointment scenario. Talbott added that he 
hoped that a "zero-sum" factor would not develop between the two sides. There was 
already some of this in public. What signals should we send, perhaps now, or after our 
meeting with the Prime Minister on Monday? 
Singh said that he had looked closely at the fissile material moratorium last night. 
1.4(B) 
1.4(D) 
B1 
Talbott asked why the 
US language did not help in this regard. 
Talbott 
said that the US formula did not require India to act until others had done so. The 
Chinese approach to the CWC was an example which would be thrown in his face if 
India pursued the US-suggested approach. Singh repeated that he needed to have the 
Parliament as a partner in a decision. If only one member chose to pursue the issue 
thoroughly, it would become the subject of serious study. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021

[Page 5]
C 0 6 7 7 0 9 92 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021 
Talbott said this might'be why we might have to wait until next year. Singh interrupted 
quickly. No, he said, no, you overstate the problem. I'm only waiting for the close of my 
next Parliamentary session. Talbott replied that the US team would have a short review 
session; Singh could thereafter give a review in the plenary of what the Indian side 
believed a workable calendar might look like. Singh repeated that India's commitment to 
CTBT was specific. He had a timeframe in mind to get Parliament on board by the end 
of April, meaning the cabinet could sign in late April or early May. That meant he could 
not put fismat in front of them now. Talbott asked if that meant that fismat would 
overload the circuits and that the issue should be staggered. Right, Singh relied. So, 
Talbott said,„that meant putting a pubic statement on fismat post-Parliament. Whatever I 
say on fisrnat, Singh said, I have to have Parliament on board. Amb. Celeste recalled the 
Prime Minister's language in the Parliament (If others were to agree...India would not be 
found wanting." Singh added that this was nearly identical to the language the PM had 
also deployed at the UNGA. He observed that for the US, the issue was geographically 
distanced, but for India the issue was direct and immediate, for historical reasons. 
Singh asked what should now be said to the press. That we would now meet again? 
Talbott agreed. Talbott and Singh agreed to meet again at noon on Sunday, January 31. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06770992 Date: 03/24/2021