[Page 1]
C 0 6 7 0 2 79 6 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
; • • --' • 4 
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
PARTICIPANTS; GERMANY 
Chancellor Helmut Kohl 
National Security Advisor 
Joachim Bitterlich 
UNITED STATES 
Deputy Secretary Strobe Talbott 
Assistant Secretary John Kornblum 
DATE/TIME/PLACE: January 15, 1997, 12:00 - 2:15 p.m..
Federal Chancellery, Bonn 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
ST personal note to Sandy Berger: immediately before this meeting, I told 
my principal interlocutors in Bonn, Wolfgang Ischinger and Joachim 
Bitterlich, that POTUS wanted me to inform the Chancellor privately and 
informally of his intention to nominate A/S Kornblum to be Ambassador to 
the Federal Republic. Ischinger replied that this was extremely welcome 
news, that Kornblum has a reputaiion in Bonn as "the American who 
knows us best — we were hoping very much for this; it augurs well, and it 
comes at a vitally important time." When we entered his office, Kohl, 
having been alerted by Bitterlich, warmly greeted Kornblum as "the new 
man, a very good man, and not a minute too soon." Kornblum's mastery 
of German instantly impressed the Chancellor and, at several points 
during the conversation that followed, they engaged in intense direct 
discussion. Before breaking for lunch, Kohl inscribed a book to 
Kornblum, and at the end of the session, Kohl, beaming, told me, "A 
good choice! Thank the President for me. When can this fellow get here 
and start work?" Bitterlich afterward described the chemistry between 
soon-to-be ambassador-designate and the Chancellor as "wondelful." 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS, 
4/17/2019 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 2]
C 0 6 7 0 2 79 6 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
r'‘ 
-0-
Begin memcon... (Kohl had on his coffee table a neatly typed, fairly thick 
paper — it appeared to be the memcon of ST's session with Chirac the 
day before, translated into German and with several references to NATO — 
marked in yellow highlighter.) 
KOHL: I have been spending a good deal of time thinking about the 
United States in the past two days. The President of Brandeis University 
was here yesterday to invite me to speak at their 50th anniversary 
celebration in May, 1998. I have been trying to stimulate political and 
intellectual contacts between Jews in Germany and the United States. The 
contact will never be what it was before the war, but I want to achieve a 
dramatic increase in exchanges, also with Israel. We are now in the 
ironic situation where most contacts between Israel and the EU are 
supported mainly by Germany. All recent prime ministers of Israel have 
said that after the US, Germany is Israel's most important partner. 
TALBOTT: I congratulate you for that invitation. The significance is 
obvious and a personal testament to you. You are the personification of 
the new Germany and we regard you as such. You are also a leader and a 
builder of the new Europe. Your friend President Clinton, who sends you 
his warmest regards, sees you that way. I hope that a year from now, 
you will be able to give that speech at Brandeis about the success in - 
constructing a new, safer, more integrated Europe that you and President 
Clinton made possible in 1997. One of the Clinton Administration's most 
important foreign policy priorities is to work to make that vision come 
true. That means realization of the goals of NATO enlargement and 
NATO-Russia relations. 
The President has many important partners in this task, but you are of 
particular importance. Not only is your personal relationship close, but 
you have demonstrated leadership in so many areas. Moreover, you 
have, in your 14 years in this office, established a record of steadfastness, 
resolve, farsightedness and strategic wisdom. The President is acutely 
aware of the role you played in the INF debate at the beginning of your 
term and later the role you played in making sure that Germany reunited 
within NATO. He sees you as the embodiment of two qualities we will 
need in the next six months: one is steady nerves; the other is a quality I 
heard a lot about from your friend, and President Clinton's friend, 
• 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case N . F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 3]
CO 67 027 9 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
r  
kk„e 
Jacques Chirac yesterday in Paris — finesse. By that I mean subtlety, 
imagination and determination when dealing with a very difficult problem. 
We are now faced with a very difficult problem indeed. John Kornblum 
and I, along with others in our Administration, have been working with 
Joachim Bitterlich and Wolfgang Ischinger to identify those areas where 
, our views are identical and those areas where we need to fill the gaps so 
that we can achieve full agreement on all aspects of our project. 
Tomorrow I will report to President Clinton and his foreign-policy team 
on my discussions with you, with President Chirac, with Javier Solana 
and with Malcolm Rifkind. I am optimistic that if we stay together we 
can achieve with Yeltsin a major step forward on NATO and on Europe. 
KOHL: Please give my greetings to the President. I hope we can talk on 
the telephone soon. I came out strongly for his re-election even though 
that caused some upset in other groups. We have a personal friendship. 
You can't always use personal relationships to solve problems, but we 
have good chemistry between us. You can solve problems without 
chemistry, but it isn't such a pleasure as it is with your President. 
We are now at a historical crossroads. In private life as in public, you 
should always adopt a give-and-take attitude with others. Life is not a 
one-way street. Gestures are as important as deeds — that's why I 
appreciate my personal relationship with the President. I appreciate a 
President who can listen. He understands that while the U.S. is important, 
it needs genuine partners, not subordinates. 
Bill Clinton is different from other Americans who have not 
acknowledged that Europe is back — we're once again a major player on 
the scene. Of course it is important that the U.S. looks also to Asia, but 
it would be fatal for all of us if Americans believed that Europe was not 
important. 
I assure you, Europe will go from strength to strength. The EURO will 
come. Despite differences, the common European house will be built. 
The kind of Europe I would like to see evolve also needs a close 
relationship with the United States. - 
We have for years looked to the .German-American relationship as a 
bridge across the Atlantic. It must stay that way, but we also need new 
) 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case NorF-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 4]
C 0 6 7 0 2 79 6 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
lanes on the bridge — better economic, scientific and cultural ties. A11 of 
these exist, but there is enormous room for expansion. Germany is an 
integral part of this Europe — it is the biggest and most important 
country. 
From a psychological point of view, the US and Germany are predestined --
to have good relations. We must use this chance. I want to stress that I 
will do everything to our future a successful one. 
I must tell you that in our country, as elsewhere in Europe, there is an 
undertone of anti-Americanism. This has something to do with the 
challenges of the last few decades. You mentioned the Euromissile 
debate. That was a time when these sentiments appeared again. I charted 
a clear course which won big support in Germany. I remember when I 
first came into this office, I had to move back and forth by helicopter 
because there were such vast throngs of protesters out there [gesturing 
toward the window and the park outside]. 
The end of the Cold War did not bring an end to all problems — 
Yugoslavia is a good example. But it is hard to make the Germans 
understand. They only see the changes. Our problems with conscription 
are a good example. Actually the Yugoslav crisis helped with that. But 
other misunderstandings are also there. That means we must cooperate as 
much as possible. 
There will also be problems in areas such as trade. We must work 
together so that these issues will not develop into fundamental differences. 
Nothing has changed between us, but the world around us has changed. 
Many are hypocritical about things such as support for Central Europe 
and expansion of the EU. If there were today a truly secret vote among 
my EU colleagues, I am not sure we would have a majority for 
expansion. So many Europeans have internal problems. They are 
worried that expansion will make their lives more difficult. But if we 
rejected expansion of the EU, the result would be catastrophic. 
We can't tell the Poles and the Czechs that they are not welcome after 
what they did to survive communism. Even the language of politics has 
changed. We now speak again of Central Europe rather than Eastern 
Europe. Germany's eastern border is the Polish western border. This is 
also the Oder-Neisse border. To Germans and Poles alike, this border 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 5]
C 0 6 7 0 2 79 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
means expulsion — Germans from the Eastern territories and Poles by 
Stalin from Eastern Poland. We have signed treaties to accept these 
borders, and these treaties are sacred. But the truth is that our people 
know what has happened there. This border can truly disappear only if 
Poland enters the EU. That is why Germany is the strongest proponent of 
enlargement of the EU. That's why I say that European integration is of — 
existential importance to us. 
This is not just a moral issue; it is also much in our interest to have this 
development now and not in the future. 
That is also why we need NATO enlargement. Some believe that if the 
EU expands, we can dispense with NATO enlargement. This is 
especially wrong because not All EU members are members of NATO. 
That will change. The Austrians and Finns and Swedes cannot stay 
neutral forever. Neutral against what? What does it mean to be neutral 
now? 
But the mixed nature of the EU causes us problems. Our own young 
people do not understand why a Bavarian must serve in the army while an 
Austrian from Salzburg does not. This will only work for a short time. 
Europeans cannot build a common market without also defending each 
other as well. That means that entry into the EU is not a substitute for 
membership in NATO. 
It is therefore important not to let the schedule we have set slip. We are 
agreed that EU enlargement negotiations will begin within six months 
after conclusion of the IGC. Even if everything goes perfectly, 
enlargement will take years. The treaties must be ratified by all EU 
parliaments. The earliest that any new member can.be admitted is 2002. 
As I say, my clear position is that the EU is no substitute for NATO 
enlargement. It is important that you understand that this is our clear 
position. 
Time is running out. Speaking frankly, we need a small circle. Any 
indiscretion would have fatal consequences for NATO. 
Why? The situation in Russia is getting more difficult all the time, both 
concerning NATO and in other areas. New waves of nationalism are 
mounting in Russia. People such as Lebed are growing in importance. 
• 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 6]
C 0 6 7 0 2 79 6 7IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
Seventy years of dictatorship has left Russians in total ignorance of the 
world around them. Two generations couldn't get out into the world. 
Russia has a surprisingly free press, but the people have no experience in 
forming independent judgments. 
It is crucial for our success that we understand the psychology of the 
Russian people. They say to themselves: "We were a super power. All 
the world was graid of us. Now they are treating us as if we were poor 
relations." 
Not so long ago — in the early 1980's — there were three state funerals in 
MOscow. Each was an incredible circus. A11 the world's leaders 
congregated as if they were in ancient Rome. The current crop of 
leaders, including Yeltsin, have these pictures in their minds. They 
remember the whole world turning out to pay respect to dead Russian 
leaders. Now they say: "We are nothing tO them." 
I remember an EU Council meeting with Yeltsin in December, 1992. We 
were discussing the economic situation, and the atmosphere was bad. The 
behavior of the Europeans reminded me of a group of teachers deciding 
whether yeltsin had passed or failed in his oral exam. Under the table, 
he took my hand and said: "Helmut, they don't like me; they don't like us 
[the Russians]." 
You can tell Yeltsin that his fears and insecurities are not grounded in 
reality, but in fact, there is some truth to what he senses. He is the best 
of the current political figures that might come to power there. And he's 
not the only one we can imagine being there in the future. Pressures are 
building. Two weeks ago he said again to me what people are thinking in 
Novosibirsk, his hometown [sic: it's actually Sverdlovsk]. They are 
frightened. This is his psychology; it's their psychology. You can make 
politics with a people's psychology — just look at 20th century Germany 
Yeltsin knows he has no veto over NATO enlargement, but his 
psychology is complicated. It is important to take account of his 
psychology when we devise our strategy. 
I said to him, "Don't think of making more trouble for yourself by getting 
involved in Belarus. Same holds true for Ukraine." I always say that 
after Russia and Germany, Ukraine will be the third mostimportant 
country in Europe. It will become a strong country. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 7]
C 0 6 7 0 2 79 6 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
TALBOTT: I hope so. 
KOHL: I have no doubt. I see how much damage there was in East 
Germany after forty years of division. Ukraine was under dictatorship for 
70 years. 
But it is true that we don't have much time left. They may sound tough 
now, but time is short. 
I don't think yeltsin will last out his term. According to two very good 
German doctors who participated in the operation, it was a success. But 
when I saw him before me, it was not the same Yeltsin of a year ago. 
Mentally he was still there. He rarely used notes. But he is very 
reduced. He wants to continue his work, but after two hours he was very 
tired. 
Seeing me seemed to be deeply moving for him. He had underestimated 
the severity of his illness. He was not so sure he would survive. He told 
me this on the phone just before the operation. It was interesting that for 
this conversation he only wanted to use the interpreter from the German 
side. And when he saw me two weeks ago, it was an emotional 
encounter. I am no doctor, but I believe we should make good use of the 
time remaining. If the chances are ever going to be good, it is now. 
Yeltsin was very happy that President Clinton was re-elected. He trusts 
Clinton — he thinks he is the best American leader. He has great 
mistrust of the others, especially some in Congress whom he calls war 
mongers. 
That's his situation. He has a circle of advisors, many of whom are 
already looking beyond Yeltsin. It's a bit like in the Vatican today. 
There are others who know that when he is gone, they will be gone. That 
makes Yeltsin very suspicious, but he places great hopes in Prime 
Minister Chernomyrdin. 
That's my analysis. I don't have a simple solution, but I do know that we 
don't have much time. In the next few weeks, we must figure out how to 
meet the July deadline. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No.-F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 8]
C 0 6 7 0 2 79 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
I want to stress: I am absolutely against postponing the summit. If we 
were to postpone, it would only make things more difficult. 
We must have a clear vision and nerves of steel. I know that internal 
adaptation of NATO is also important, but enlargement must be the 
number one priority. 
AT THIS POINT THE MEETING MOVED TO LUNCH. 
TALBOTT: The conversation we have just had is one of the more useful 
I or any other American official has had on this subject. Your reference 
to strong nerves and a clear vision over the next six months is exactly the 
message I hoped you would give me to take back to President Clinton. I 
must tell you in all candor, I did not get this message from President 
Chirac. 
I have already reported to President Clinton that I was not encouraged by, 
the message from Chirac: I had the distinct impression that he, unlike 
you, has not made up his mind about whether to go through with Madrid, 
come what may in the NATO-Russia dialogue. 
I listened carefully to your larger vision on integration. You and 
President Clinton are of one mind. Since he is in Washington, his 
perspective is in some respects different, because he also looks to the 
Pacific. But he has no doubt that the European dimension of post-Cold 
War integration is more complicated and more difficult than any other, at 
least in the immediate future. 
Assuming she is confirmed, I would personally not be surprised if 
Secretary-designate Albright were to come to Europe very early in her 
tenure. She regards developing her own working relations with key 
Allies as a very high priority. 
You used one phrase that I will remember vividly: the process of 
European integration is of "existential" importance to Germany This is 
also true for the United States. We do not live in Europe, but our fate is 
tied up here just as closely as is yours. America cast its lot with Europe 
in World War I, in World War LI, in the Cold War — and we are doing 
so again now in the post-Cold War era. 
KOHL: And so you must — in part so that there are no more wars here. 
I mentioned Russian psychological fears. How can we address them? Of 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 9]
C 0 6 7 0 2 79 6 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
course the enlargement process must run normally — there must be 
negotiations and participation by all Allies. 
But I am definitely of the opinion that a small group of us — Clinton, 
Kohl, Chirac and Major — should play a special role in a psychologically 
astute manner. This should not be a high-profile role. I want to make 
this clear — I am only interested in reaching our goal. I have no desire 
for personal rewards. 
You will be surprised to hear that that is why I want to give Chirac a 
special role in this process. Adenauer told me and many other people: 
salute the tricolor three times for every time you salute the German flag. 
We must find a way to give Chirac a special role. One way would be to 
meet with Yeltsin together at five, and we could do this in Paris. Chirac 
assured me he very much liked the idea. 
TALBOTT: Your analysis of what, is happening and what we should do 
about it tracks in some key respects with our own. We have our own 
understanding of the psychological dimension of the challenge of dealing 
with Russia. President Clinton is careful and skillful in the way he 
interacts with Yeltsin. He will be very willing to work on this problem. 
Incidentally, you mentioned Yeltsin's trust in Chernomyrdin: We can 
sense that since his illness, Yeltsin has given Chernomyrdin more 
authority and scope, including authority to deal with NATO issues. The 
upcoming meeting between Vice President Gore and Chernomyrdin will 
be very important. 
Leon Fuerth and I are going to Moscow next week. Joachim Bitterlich 
and I will be there at the same time and we will coordinate our 
approaches very closely. 
Now, on the idea of a Summit at Five: President Chirac made that 
propOsal the centerpiece ofhis meeting with me. But there are twelve 
other members of the Alliance. We must preserve the transparency of the 
Alliance for all sorts of practical reasons of high principle and also for 
very practical reasons. I am thinking particularly of our Turkish friends. 
We must not, in reality or in perception, ever be in the position of 
negotiating for our Allies over their heads or behind their backs. There 
• 
9 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 10]
C 0 6 7 0 2 7 9 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
would be a serious price for that. My government feels strongly about 
this. 
I made this clear to President Chirac, but I also said I'd convey back to 
Washington his idea. Another idea came, on which I'cl be interested in 
your view. Hypothetically, if there were a meeting at five, what about 
making it six and having Solana as the man to represent the other twelve? 
KOHL: This is clearly another problem, but let's be frank. We have to 
give priority to embracing Yeltsin in the positive sense of that word — 
and we have to do so before July, well before July. Time is running out 
,on us. 
If we fail, others will say that the Americans have not done a good job. 
then they will say that Helmut Kohl was asleep and should never have let 
it happen. Finally, the French will say that they knew better all the time, 
but the Americans would not listen. 
I have seen this happen in the EU for more than 14 years. Whenever a 
problem comes up, I arn always faced with the dilemma of whether to get 
together with the French and push a solution. If I don't, the others say 
that we are not accepting responsibility. If I do, they cry about the 
Franco-German axis. 
It is just a question of which kind of criticism I am willing to accept. I 
am used to it. 
Another asset is Wim Kok, the Dutch Prime Minister. We can use him as 
a go-between with the others. There will also be a problem with Spain 
and Italy, but if we are serious, we can do something special. We must 
also make clear that normal procedures continue. 
TALBOT: I'm sure my President will consider any proposal you make 
seriously, in large measure because it comes from you. And in this case 
it comes from you and President Chirac. I've given you my initial 
reaction and my very real concern, which I'm sure is reflected in 
Washington. But since our minds will be open to the 4+1 idea you have 
suggested, I hope you'll think about the 4+1+1 alternative. I did not 
make this proposal to Chirac, but it did come up with Levitte. 
n 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 11]
C O 6 7 0 2 79 6 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
BITTERLICH: I did get a first impression of it from the French. Chirac 
was skeptical. Yeltsin does not consider Solana to be a paitner of equal 
stature. 
KOHL: I have no problem with the idea, but I believe Yeltsin will have a 
problem. 
TALBOTT: But we are trying to help Yeltsin overcome his problems 
with NATO. We must also think of the role of the twelve other Allies. 
Even if Solana were included, we'd still have serious questions and 
problems: 
KOHL: But Yeltsin does not see Solana as an equal. 
TALBOTT: I'm not saying where he'd sit at the table. Besides, Mr. 
Chancellor, this is not an official proposal. It's an informal sounding. We 
have to think over the usefulness of such a meeting in any case. There 
are possible variants. 
KOHL: Or maybe he could come in later, after our meeting with Yeltsin. 
TALBOTT: In any case, I have not made an official proposal and you 
have not rejected the idea I've floated informally. That is all I can ask. 
We need to keep working on it. 
When would you have such a meeting? 
KOHL: The meeting should be thought out carefully. It should have a 
positive psychological effect. Yeltsin should be able to say afterwards 
that he played a special role in the process. - He can say: "I helped 
decide; I am a big guy." That's very important to him. 
If we move in this direction, the people around him will also become 
supporters. They will believe that they can depend on is success. We 
will be able to co-opt them. I am thinking of the Foreign Minister 
[Primakov, whom Kohl and Bitterlich have recently disparaged im several 
occasions]. 
As to timing, it depends on his psychological condition and on the 
location. 
• 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 12]
C 0 6 7 0 2 79 6 F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
TALBOTT: Also, we have an old rule in Washington — you probably 
have the same rule in Bonn: never go to a meeting unless you are sure of 
what outcome you want and are pretty sure you can get it. When can we 
close ranks at 16 so that we can go to the Russians with the contents to be 
blessed at the meeting of the 5 or the 6? 
KOHL: Of course we can hold the meeting only if we are sure of a 
successful outcome. But yeltsin knows that too. Our cards are not all 
bad. Yeltsin needs help too. I would introduce a mixture of issues for 
him, including the G-7/ G-8. Which will it be this year in Denver, G-7 
or G-8? 
, TALBOTT: It will be both a meeting of the G-7' and of what we're now 
calling the Eight. 
KOHL: I'm not too worried about the psychology of the others in 
- NATO. Some will always be insulted, but we must say clearly — do we 
want a result or not? 
TALBOTT: Ambassador Kornblum might give you some of our broader 
thinking on the inter-relationships in NATO. 
KORNBLUM: As you said Mr. Chancellor, the various tracks of the 
integration of Europe are interrelated. We are trying to pursue a broad 
strategy. This means that we must keep various kinds of sensitivities in 
mind. 
As Secretary Talbott suggested, there is a complicated situation 
developing with Turkey. We have been following this closely and are 
working up a special effort for the Eastern Mediterranean this year. 
Turkey has been watching Greek tactics. ,The Turks assume that a 
number of Northern Europeans will never admit a divided Cyprus into the 
EU. 
KOHL: They are veiy right about that! 
KORNBLUM: They are trying to link NATO enlargement to their 
acceptance by the EU as potential members. They want to be in the same 
category as Poland. 
12 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 13]
C 06 7 0 2 7 9 6 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
( • isp  ~t. p -
r 
And the Greeks are seeking a reverse linkage. The Greek Foreign 
Minister repeats often to us that if Germany wants to block Cyprus, 
Greece can block Poland too. 
KOHL: Don't worry: I will not allow myself to be blackmailed by the 
Greeks. They need German and EU support more than we need them. If --
President Clinton every has trouble in that part of the world, just let me 
know. I will react very strongly and help you with solutions. 
TALBOTT: Another world about Turkey: There will continue to be 
concerns, even suspicions in Ankara over the CFE flank issue. Yet we 
need to move forward fast on a new CFE negotiation. We shouldn't 
create new problems in an effort to solve old ones. That is why the 
Solana idea might help. 
KOHL: I am not against Solana, but I have clear priorities. It is more 
important that the meeting take place than that Solana be there. 
• TALBOTT: We have a number of problems with the idea of such a 
meeting. The biggest is that it could result in discord within the Alliance 
at a very difficult time. This could endanger the whole project. We must 
reconcile the two concerns. 
KOHL: We shall fmd a number of NATO members ready to assist us — 
the Belgians, the Dutch, Norway, Luxembourg. Wim Kok will be here 
on February 4. I will raise it with him. 
In summary, I would like to make the following points: 
Our German and European interest is to pursue a friendly development in 
Russia. It is hard to predict what will happen. Yeltsin's illness did not 
lead to an upheaval. The Russians have big economic problems — but 
they also live in a completely different environment. 
My sons' professors at HarVard and MIT use economic models which are 
not relevant to Russia. For example, the question of corruption. 
When the Russian fleet left Kronstadt in 1904 to meet the Japanese, one 
cruiser which was on the books did not even exist. The commanding 
admiral was fired, but he was back in command in 1914. The Russians 
are famous for their Potemkin villages. So corruption has been a fact of 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 14]
C 06  7 0 2 79 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
life for a long time. But they have incredible powers of endurance and 
innovation. I have flown over the countryside in a helicopter. Every 
village has at least 30 percent new houses. How is this possible? Yet 
there it is: it is possible! Cheap land and cheap credits and the people 
have homes._ 
This is also part of Russian reality. We must use the time we have to 
build as much trust as possible. This is a German and an American job. 
We have slightly different perspectives, but we must do this together. 
Second, what is our alternative? If NATO enlargement fails now, we will 
have e dismal situation for many years. Again, the Americans will be 
blamed and the President will be blamed. Certain circles will make much 
of the failure. 
Please tell Bill Clinton as a friend: I don't want that to happen. I want to 
use these four years to capitalize on American leadership. These are 
fantastic times. Even today's beautiful weather is symbolic of our hopes. 
If I look back pn my fourteen .years as Chancellor,.things have improved 
greatly. 
In 1982, we had 400,000 demonstrators here against INF. Some were 
paid agents, some were misguided and many were honest people who 
were afraid. 
Then, in 1990, everyone said reunification would never work. Only two 
leaders, George Bush and Felipe Gonzalez believed in us. A11 others 
were against it. Yet we succeeded, together. 
We must continue to talk and think carefully about how we can do this 
together. 
TALBOTT: You've brought us full-circle, Mr. Chancellor; you've ended 
on the point I made at the outset — with reference to your political 
courage, your willingness to stick by your guns and follow through on 
tough decisions even when a lot of people were arrayed against you. 
That's just what we need over the next six months: steadiness, resolve, 
determination. 
14 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019

[Page 15]
C 0 6 70 2 79 67IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019 
I will report to the President and be.in close touch with Joachim next 
week. He and Wolfgang Ischinger will be our points of contact. I am 
sure that I will be back from time to time, and I know Secretary-designate 
Albright is looking forward to working with you to on this:important 
common cause as we head toward Madrid. 
KOHL: Good! But don't waste any time in getting this fellow 
(Kornblum) here as quickly as possible. 
-end-
15 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06702796 Date: 08/26/2019