[Page 1]
QO6ggg99$ FIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835997 Date: 12/28/2020
RELEASEIN FULL i
1. Russia is going through a ratherprecariousmoment in its
historywhere profound economic difficultiesare combined with an
intensepoliticalconfrontationand a relatedconstitutionalcrisis.
The more than 300 amendments to the Constitutionproposed by the 6th
and the 7th Congressesof Peoples'eputiesviolatethe principleof
the separationof power thus undermining the possibilityof normal
regulationof processesof stateadministration.
There is speculationon the objectivedifficultiesinvolvedin
a democraticreform process,and a deliberateover dramatizationof
the situation.By attemptingto weaken the legitimatepower, certainP
forceswould liketo slow down and betteryet to do away with the
economic and politicalreform.
2. At present,itis of criticalimportanceto consolidateall
reform forces,to achievea broad consensus,and to createa stable
politicalcoalitionin the society.Itis necessaryto involvein
thisprocessallinfluentialpoliticalgroupingsthatsupport
change, particularlythose thathold centristpositions,and those
are in a majority.
3. Every effortof the presidentseeks to finda civilized
solutionand to containthe processwithinlegitimatebounds. This
solutionmay be found through achieving.a mutuallyacceptable
constitutionalagreement among allthe branchesof power. Another
generallyrecognizeddemocraticoptionis holdinga general
referendum reflectingthe expressionof people'swill.If both of
theseoptionsare blocked,the Presidenthas one more constitutional
means which is a directappeal to the people to seek the view of all
the voters.
4. Defending the fundamentalprincipleof democracy — the
balanceof powers — is today becoming the mai.n criterionof firm
commitment to generaldemocraticvaluesin Russia.Maintainingthe
positionof a convinced supporterof thisprincipleand continued
commitment to the Constitutionand the agreementsreached on its
basis,the Presidentis actingas a guarantoragainsta turn to
dictatorshipin his constitutionallymandated roleof defenderof
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835997 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 2]
{ O g g 3g 997=IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835997 Date: 12/28/2020
the rightsand freedoms in Russia.Continued violationsof the hard-
won agreements,constantattackson the executiveauthoritygive the
Presidentevery reasonto decisevelyfulfillhis legaland civic
responsibilityrelying,on the populartrustexpressedto him
through the nationalelections.In the processhis objectiveis not
to do away with democraticnorms, but to.preventothersfrom doing
this.Being firmlycommitted to democraticchoice,the President
willcontinueto do allhe can to avoid any extreme optionsand'o
ensurecontinuity'ofthe processof strengtheningdemocracy and
freedom in Russia.
5. Despiteallthe severityof the currentRussian situation,
itwould a mistake to overdramatizeit.What is actuallyhappening
is a quantitativeand qualitativeevolutionof democracy.
Many stateshave gone — and are going — through similarstages;
politicalcrisesand intensedebatesare usual even for those
countrieswhich are consideredto be the paragons of democratic
stability.One would be well advisedto distinguishbetween the
sharpnessof the politicalchoice facingthe countryand the
polemicalintensitywhich has been and continuesto be inherentin
many countries'oliticalprocess.A recentexample is the evolution
of the FifthRepublic in France which involvedsimilarproblems
the constitutionalcrisis,the referendum,and the search for an
acceptablebalanceof powers.
Russia is no exceptionsWe have every possibilityto combine
our unique experiencewith thatof the world. What in criticalto
have guaranteesof continueddemocraticorientation,above allto
form a stablesystem of checks and balanceswhich would ensure not a
confrontation,but a harmonic combinationbetween branchesof power
in theirpursuitof shared objectives.
6. We feelthe closeattentionto and the profound interestin
what is happening in Russia.We don'twant our domestic processesto
be sensationalized;rather,we want them to be perceivedin a sober-
minded manner and with the understandingof Russia'sroleand
importancein thisinterdependentworld.
Itwould be a big mistake to conclude from what is happening
thatRussia is sinkingintoanarchy,or thatitis impossibleto do
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835997 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 3]
Q P 6 Q 35 9 9 /IFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835997 Date: 12/28/2020
businesswith it,to investcapitalin it,etc.
Actually,the oppositeis true.Itis the currentdifficulties
thathighlightthe need for a broad internationalsupportof the
reform forcesin Russia.Such supporthas more than once proved its
worth for the processof democraticchange'inour country.Those who
i
trulywant to see Russia freeand democraticshould finallyget down
to the businessof economic and politicalinteractionwith our
countryof a qualitativelynew and genuinelypartnershiplevel.
7. Of greatimportancewas the meeting of Russia'sCouncil of
Ministersheld on March 5, which unequivocallysupportedthe
President'spolicy.The meeting noted,in particular,thatto itthe
Presidentcontinuesto be the main pillarin a situationwhere the
legislatureis engeged in a froutalattackon the authorityof the
government and localadministration.The government. alsoagreeswith
'-
the main princ'ipleof the draftagreement between the legislative
and executivebranches,preparedby the President,to the effect.
thatneitherof them should interferein the day-to-dayactivityof
the government.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835997 Date: 12/28/2020