[Page 1]
Qo 68$ $ cog j FIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835951 Date: 12/28/2020
February 7, 1993
Toby Gati and Nick Burns
NSC Staff/OEOB, 3rd floor
BY HAND — PERSONAL,&
RELEASEIN FULL
Dear Toby and Nick:
The purpose of thisletterisnot to tellyou guysanythingyou don'tknov, but to make clearthatthe penny hasfinallydropped in my own noggin: the key to our successisgoing to be making our NSC committee truly— and as exclu-sivel as ossible— the sourceof optionsand recommenda-
tionsforthe Presidenton allmattersrelatingto the FSU.
This pastweek was both instructiveand encouragingto me, thanksto the two of you.
Toby, I can'ttellyou how impressedI vas by the way
you handled the chairmanshipof the Wednesday meeting,moving
us throughexactlythe rightagenda and puttingallthose
craggy veteranson noticethatthe nev management isentirely
up to the job.
As foryou, Comrade Burns, your instinctsabout hov
to handle the subgroup on economic initiativemake me realize
anew how an importantpartof my job isgoing to be followingyour advice and givingyou as much supportas possible.
'heexperienceviththe economic subgroup providesa
model of hov we'houldproceed and a cautionarytaleaboutthe obstacleswe face.The subgroupsmust generategood ideasin the most thorough,timelyand persuasiveway possible;andwe'e got to keeping deterringthe otheragencies,particu-larlyDefense and Treasury,from bypassingor leapfroggingour committee in theirovn effortsto get FSU-relatedideasto the Presidentand to drivedecisionsdovnward. We'e gotto vin over the individualsatDoD and Treasury,convincing
them thatthey can play and starby being on our team; andwe'e got to keep Tony and Sandy alertand supportiveinblockingend runs.
A word or two about my partin this.I can tellthat
a good deal of my own energy isgoing to go intomaking thecommittee work. That'sgoing to me constantconspiringwiththe two of you on scriptingthe fullcommittee meetings,
figuringout in advance what we want to come out of them, and
then vorkingthe agenda and participants'istsaccordingly.
Bob Fauver and Lynn Pascoe are going to be absolutelyessential.in allthis.(This isassuming thatRich Kauzlarichsucceedsin the days ahead in gettingapprovalfor Bob and
Lynn as DAS equivalentson my staff.)Itisclearto me that
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835951 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 2]
QQ ggg5951IED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835951 Date: 12/28/2020
'heessenceof each'sjob descriptionisto masterthe sub-stanceand processin his areas,economics and
security/a.c./military,and do everythingin hispower tosteerthingsthroughour committee.
I was impressedFridayby the way Bob handled thematterof the subgroup on economic initiative.He immediately
saw the wisdom of Nick'stakingon a coordinatingfunctionand threw himselfintoharnesswith Nick to get started.
In Bob's case,the trickiestmatter,isgoing to behelpingus keep Summers on board and under control.Thatmeans strokinghim when possible,honking him (or having Tonybonk him) when necessary.
While Bob has to deal with a single-warheadheavymissile,Lynn has to deal with a MIRV: Wisner, Allison,Carter,Halperin,Warner and God knows who else.I'easkedLynn, at the earliestpossiblemoment, pay a courtesycallonhisnamesake, Under SecretaryDavis and, sayingthatI askedhim to,get her to recountforhim the wonderful,touchingpower play thatFrank put on forus in Tarnoff'sofficialof-fice(minus Tarnoff)Fridayafternoon.You two should get areadouton that,sessionas well.Any such meetings in the fu-tureshould includeRose!
Lynn Pascoe probablyalreadyknows Jim Timbie and Bob
Einhorn prettywell.They are going to be essentialto himand to us, sincethey'egot the match the DoD team in throw-weight. (I'm incorrigible,aren'tI?) He should alsospendsome time with.Rose. I assume she can duplicatewith Lynnwhat Bob Fauver and Nick have alreadylaunched (OK, un-dertaken)in the economic area.
Tony's willingnessto takemy callon Saturdayandhisreassurancesthathe'dback us up on the Summers problemwas heartening.Pleasefinda way to tellhim how much I ap-preciatewhat he did.And reiteratemy denialthatI ever letpass my lipsa Freudianslipabout my working for Summers. Idon'tcare ifit'son the tapes,and I don'tcare ifthe twoof you thinkyou heard the same thing!My inclinationistohold off on furtherdiscussionof thiswith Tony untilI see
how we do on our own. That'spartlybecause Tony put theproperstructurein placeto begin with and seems, along withSandy, to be backing us when necessary.
Tom Pickeringwas good enough to come to my house on
Saturdayafternoon.We had what I consideredto be a terrificconversation,includingabout the importanceof the inter-agency'dimensionto my job.He, too, isgoing to be vitalinseveralways. I'm confidenthe and his colleaguesin the em-
bassy willbe the sourcenot justof reportingand analysisbut of good ideasforus to advance to the President.
2
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835951 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 3]
Q Q 6 8 Q Q cI 5 j =IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835951 Date: 12/28/2020
Tom villbe around allweek. I stronglyurge you two
to invitehim over and spend some time with him. Take him to
White House Ness ifour Presidenthasn t abolishedityet.
Speaking of good ideas,I thoughtTim Wirth had a
number thatve should followup: upgradingengagement withRussia (and some of the otherNIS) on energy;a nature-for-
debt deal forthe Far East.Think about ways to followup on
that,working as closelyas possiblewith him. He's lookingfor alliesand ideason which he can give meaning to.hisnev
job. Let'sfigureout a way to be help him do that--chan-
nelinghis ideas,with fullcreditto him and participationwith him, throughour committee. For example, let'sget him
thinkingabout being an invitedprincipalat one of our fullcommittee meetings as soon as possibleafterhe'sconfirmed
and has some concretesuggestionsthatve can then vork
througha subgroup,presumably with Energy and, what? EPA?
Commerce?
Galitwillbe the pointof contactifyou need toreachme thisveek. I'lbe checking in with her tovardthe
end of every afternoon.She can be reachedeitherthroughthe
TINE number, 861-4029, or throughmy transitionoffice,736-
4510.
See you in a week. Thanks foreverything.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835951 Date: 12/28/2020