[Page 1]
C06835 j 8 j =IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/2020
Cl'inton-YeltsinMeeting
June 17, 1995, 2:45-3:55pm
CitadelInn, Halifax,Nova Scotia
lRE LEAS E IN F ULL
WJC: There are a number of items to discuss.On Chechnya,I'etriedto be more supportivethan many othersbecause I understandhow difficulta problem thisis. But breakingthe cycle of violenceis the rightthing. [Yeltsinhad, in the pressavailabilityjustbeforethe meeting, saidDudayev had asked for and
been given asylum in Turkey.] I hope thatDudayev's
leavingwillhelp bringthisto a closeand be an
opening to shuttingdown the militaryphase of thisepz.soda
BNY Yes, it'lbe betternow.
WJC: The second issueis reactorsales. We don'tneed todiscussthisin detail.I am satisfiedby thestatementmade by our group [theP-8], and hope we
can keep working to a resolution.
BNY Yes, just.as I promised.
WJC: You'now what our view is,and Vice PresidentGore
and Prime MinisterChernomyrdin willwork thison the29th and 30th of June. I hope you'lsupporttheirefforts.
BNY: Absolutely.
WJC: There'sa matterrelatedto Chechnya thatI must
bringup. We stillhaven'tfound any traceof Fred
Cuny. It'sbeen 10 weeks and we stilldon'tknow
what happened. Your people are helping--thanks forthat--but we need to stepup our efforts.
BNY: I personallyhave taken responsibilityforthat. I
personallydirectedthe Ministerof 'InternalAffairs,the Ministerof Securit.yand the Ministerof Defense
to findout what happened to him. We willstop atnothinguntilwe findout what happened.
WJC: On European Security,consistentwith our agreementin Moscow, I believeyou need to make clearto
Kozyrev and the MFA thatthey shouldpursue the
Russia-NATO dialogue. That way we can make itclearto the world thatwe'e turneda new page in history
and we'e not going to permit any new divisions.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 2]
go 6835/8 g IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835181 Date: 12/28/2020
BNY: Billwe agreed in,Moscow thata day or two priortothe NAC, we would joinPFP, and we did so. But atthe same time, you and I alsoagreed thatourrelationswith NATO and our attitudeon expansionshould be discussedfurtherin Halifaxand again inOctober at the FiftiethAnniversaryof the UN. We'e
passed throughthe first.stage.There are stillcontradictionsand disagreementsin our domesticpolit.icson this.
Today we are consideringa second stepto advancethisissue. The main thingis thatRussia agreesto
work out an allianceor treatybetween Russia and
NATO and on certainforms of interactionbetween us.Ifwe can achievetheseunderstandings--thatformula forour relations--thatwillhelp deal withpeople who are afraidabout NATO gettingclosertoour borders. Then we'lboth be winners.
WJC: One way to make people lessfrightenedwould be forthe U.S. and Russian militariest.o cooperatein PFP.
I know you have otherconcerns,but I stillfeelthatU.S.-Russianmilitarycooperationwillhelp peoplesee thatthere'snothingto be afraidof here. Thatis what PFP is supposed to do. You can send yoursoldiersto otherplaces--thatwillsend the rightsignal.Think about that.
BNY: That'sa new idea. We should thinkabout itcarefully.
WJC: I thinkitwillhelp people see what the words likepartnershipand cooperationactuallymean. Our
soldiersand yours can do thingstogether.Itwillsend a good signal.
BNY: I understand. Itwould be helpfulifthathappened.I'linstructmy militaryto take actionwithoutdelay.
But I' alsoliketo say, Bill,thatit'sveryimportantfor you.to take account of the attitudeandfeelingsof our people who stillhave a long way to
go in gettingover the Cold War. They are still
somewhat afraidof NATO and afraidof the U.S. Imyself and the Russian leadershiphave no doubt aboutour partnership.; We'l buildthe partnershipon thebasisof our friendship,yours and mine, and we'ldo
so for the sake of world,peace. But we need thesupport'four peoples. For the time being, we muststickto our position,which isthatthereshould be
no rapidexpansionof NATO. We need to go carefully,
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835181 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 3]
C0$ 8$ 5] gg=lED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/202Q
stepby step,in stages. We need to explainto ourpeople --to assurethem thatthey'enotthreatened.Everythinghas to be done with precisionand with care.
WJC: That'sfine,but I'm justsayingthatmilitary-to-militarycooperationnow willservethisgoal. Itwillmake people understandthatthe Cold
War is over, whether we'e cooperatingin thirdcountriesor in the,U.S.or in Russia.
BNY:
WJC:
Okay, that'sgood. (
On CFE, we'e talkedabout thisbefore,but we'e gotto both stayengaged in orderto keep thisfrombecoming a big problem. I'esaidyou need somereliefon the limits.
BNY: On the overalllimits?
WJC: On the flanklimit.
BNY: Right, the flanklimits.
WJC: We don'tneed to get intodetailstoday, but we
should be agreed on our generalapproach. When ourexpertsmeet next week in London, ours willpropose anew map.
BNY:
WJC:
Very good. That'sterrific.
But, Boris,it'simportantthatwe understandeachotherhere. As you know, the review conferencecomes
up in '6,while the flanklimitscome intoeffectinNovember of thisyear. So while our expertswillpropose a fixin the map for next year,they willalsomake clearthatthereare thingsyou must commityourselfto thisyear. We'e got to have somethingthatwe can sellto our Alliesas a good faithefforton your partto be in compliance,something thatwillnot completelyerode your forcestructure.
BNY: I agree. Very good.
WJC: But, Boris,letme say itagain: we can'tjustleavethisto others,or itwillbog down. We'e got tostayon top of thisthing;we'e got to stayengaged,.
you and I.
BNY The only realproblem is the North Caucasus.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/202Q

[Page 4]
g06835$ 8] IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835181 Date: 12/28/2020
WJC: I know that,but it'sa very realproblem, and we'e
got to solve it.Here'sa preview of the positionour expertswillbe bringingto Moscow.
[He hands over the nonpaper plus map
Yeltsinscans the Russian-languagetext,then startsto study the map with,furrowedbrow.]
We don'tneed to get. intothe detailsnow, Boris;thiswilljusthelp speed up the work of our experts.
[Yeltsinhands the materialto Ryurikov.]
Let me go intoanothersubject.You did a good thingproposinga conferenceon nuclearsmuggling andsafety— — and I thinkI did a good thingby proposingthatothercountriesbe involved. I don'tthinkitwould have helped you very much ifRussia had ended
up being the focus of everyone'sworriesabout thisproblem.
BNY:
WJC:
I agree. Thank you.
[Hands over nonpaper on nuclearsmuggling, etc.]Let'shave the Gore-Chernomyrdin work thisproblemfurther.
The lastthingI believewe need to talkabout isTheaterBallisticMissiles. I believethatwhatwe'e done togetheron thisin Moscow makes itpossible-forus to get START II ratified.I hopethatifour Senate ratifiesit,your parliamentwillratifyittoo. Ifthat.happens, when we get togethernext time, we can say thatyou'edone more than anyleaderin historyto reduce the nuclearweaponsthreatto the world.
BNY: I'ltalkthe Parliamentintoit.
WJC: Great. That'sit--that'sallmy list.Now you caneithergo home or you can look at your cards and seeifyou'egot anythingelseyou want to raise.
BNY: In my view, the U.S.-Russianpartnershipis a greatassetto both of us in our domesticpolitics.Ithinkitwillcertainlyhelp you. Our next visitwilltake placein the Fallof '5,and we'lbetogetheragain next spring. I want thosemeetings tobe a plus for you.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835181 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 5]
C068$ 5j 8] IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2Q17-138Q4 Doc No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/2020
WJC: Well, your visitthisfallwillbe on the occasionofthe anniversaryof the UN. You can make the pointthatthe Cold War kept the UN from fulfillingits
promise duringallthoseyears,and you can sayyou'lhelp lead the world in fulfillingthatpromise.
BNY: I certainlyhope thatour next jointmeeting will
have a positiveeffecton your re-election.We needto have our teams work out initiativesand measures
so thatyou, Bill,earn loud cheersforwhat we'e
done together.
But for thatto happen, it'simportantthatthe OSCE
be the principalmechanism fordevelopinga new
securityorder in Europe. NATO is a factor,too, ofcourse,but NATO should evolve intoa politicalorganization.It'snot excludedthatover time we
can work out and sign a partnershiptreatybetweenRussia and NATO, justas we discussedin Moscow.
Today thereare deliberationsgoing on about the roleof OSCE and NATO in the realm of arms controlandthatkind of thing. We have our concernsaboutthat. We don'twant to see NATO loom too largeinthatrespect.The expansionof NATO is an issuehere; it.could aggravatethe problem.
We are aware thatNATO is thinkingabout itsown
transformation,and that'sa good thing. But we wantto see what happens in the politicalarea,not in themilitaryarea.
Regarding PFP, as you asked and I promised, we have
now signedup, and we'lstaythe course in thatrespect.
As for the ABM treaty,afterour discussionsin
I
Moscow, there'sonly one outstandingissue,andthat'sthe delineationof strategicand tacticalsystems. Do you agree.
WJC: Our expertsare working on that.
BNY." On START, itwould be very good ifwe could ratify
START II by mid '5[sic];we'e ready to do that,and we have a personalinterestin it.
On nucleartesting,I don'tknow who has more
leverageon Jacques Chirac,you or me; we'e got goodrelationswith him. But. withoutconsultingus, he'
announced thathe'sgoing to testthisfall.You andI have to talkhim out of thatbeforeSeptember, byone means or another.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 6]
go 6835/8 j IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835181 Date: 12/28/2020
I propose thatwe find an alternativethatwillallowthe necessaryexperimentsthatthe French want toconduct to be done in our laboratories--U.S. andRussian. Your expertsand ours understandallthesethings,and they can work out an initiativeto invitethe French Academy to do what itneeds to do usingour technologyand equipment. I thinkChirac willhave to buy that.
WJC: We'e essentiallymade the same proposal. Maybe
we'hould
make a jointproposal.
Last year France canceleditstests,and thatinfuriatedChirac'spartyand setoffallhisGaullist.passions.Also, Chirac clearlybelievesthatthe politicaloppositionto testingin Francehas diminished. What's more, he has a seven-yearterm. I wish we did.
[Big bellylaugh from Yeltsin.]
We should both be so lucky!
Anyway, the realpointis thatFrance wants toupgrade itsweapons, not justmaintainthey. That'what thisis allabout --not the safetyof Frenchnuclearweapons, but gettinga new generationofweapons.
BNY: Well, we'e willingto providethem off -the-shelfnucleartechnologyso thatthey don'thave to dothesetests.
WJC: Whatever we do, we'e got to turnthe politicaltide. I can'ttellyou how glad I am thatyou raisedthis.I'efeltallalone on thisone, as though my
only allieswere the editorialwriters.But now Isee you'ean allytoo. Here again is a subjectonwhich we can work together.Now thatI see how
committed you are on this,I'lask Strobe here tohave SecretaryChristopher,when they get home, come
up with a jointinitiative.
BNY: We'e got a deal [reachesover and patsthePresident'sknee.]
Now, I know you'econcernedabout fissilematerial.
WJC: Yes, and we should deal with thatat the Summit nextyear in Russia.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835181 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 7]
CO68$ 5 j 8 j =IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doe No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/2020
BNY: Absolutely.
Let me come back to the questionof the reactorsale. I can'tquitefigureout why American publicopinionand your expertsdon'tunderstandmy position
on this.I'lrepeatwhat I saidto you in Moscow.
We have thistreatywith Iranon lightwater reactorsforpeacefulpurposes. We alsohad a protocolforcentrifugesand two uranium mines, but afterour
meeting in Moscow, I declaredthe protocolnulland
void. We'l never sellanythingotherthan the LWRs
to Iran..
WJC: I understandthat'syour position,but you alsosaidto me in Moscow thatyou'd give me an opportunitytopresentyou with informationbacking up our strongbeliefthat.even the LWRs are dangerous,and we'e
doing thatthroughGore-Chernomyrdin.
BNY: Yes, that'sezactlywhat itsays righthere in my
cards -- "to be resolvedthroughGore-Chernomyrdin."
Now, speakingof LWRs, I alsowant to raisea
questionabout the DPRK. We believethatthisso-calledKEDO is being put togethertoo hastily,in
a way thatdoesn'tt:akeaccount of Russian interests.
WJC Of course I'm concernedabout Russian interests,Boris,but I'egot to give priorityto addressingthe urgentproblem at hand here. I'm tryingtoresolvethe conflictbetween South and North Korea,
which is very dangerous. Ifwe can resolveallthosedifferences,we'leliminateone big headache for allof us.
BNY: We agree with South Korea providingthe financing.forthe reactors.Pleasedon'tthinkwe'e lookingforpoliticalor economic gainshere. We want to seeNorth Korea as a non-nuclearstatein the NPT. But
we thinkthere' more thatcan be done to takeaccount of our interests.
Let me see what elseis on my list--COCOM, MTCR,
the AustralianGroup, START II,commercial spacelaunch.
Oh yes, [remindedby one of his cards] ...On CFE:
we have only a temporary interestin the North
Caucasus as an exclusionzone.
Well, we'e covered 105 issues!
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doe No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 8]
go 68/5j 8 j =IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/2020
WJC: I'm sure glad you came. Ittook a lotof politicalcourage for you to do so,.given what you'eupagainstat home. Let'shope thatDudayev' move
gives you a chance to work thisthingin Chechnya out.
[Gettingup to leave,Yeltsingave thePresidenta bear hug: there.was some
small talkabout the.circusthe nightbeforeand what a greatperformanceit
was, especiallya young female
gymnast, whom PresidentClintonsaid
was a Russian,and two twins who did ahigh-wireact.]
8
|
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835181 Date: 12/28/2020