[Page 1]
Qg 683489QFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06834890 Date: 12/28/2020
June 20, 1994
Sandy:
RELEASE IN FULL
Here'swhere our thinkingis over here on
who-pays-for-Haiti.I had wanted to talkto John Deutch now
thathe'sback from Iceland. He and I had a briefchat this
morning on the phone. Craig Johnstoneof Stateand John Hamre
of DoD willbe working the issuefurther.
Even ifthe followingdeal were made -- and John'sinitialreactionwas quitenegative--we (State)would stillhave to
reduce funding for Rwanda and Bosnia, but we could still'put
togethera credibleprogram.
o We need to work out who pays for what on Haitibeforethedebategetsout of hand and the Hillgets involved. Nurtha
willtryto protectDOD and Obey willbe anxious to protectrefugeefunds. If the disputegets intothisarena,we arealllikelyto lose,
o We allhave pressingalternativeneeds. We have intense
competitionfor refugeefunds in Bosnia and Rwanda. I am
sure DOD has compellingalternativeneeds for itsfunds.
o There are two big-ticketitems
!
1. Land-based.Costs: I propose thatState/INSpick up all
of the land-basedcostsexcept infrastructureimprovements
in Turks and Caicos (which are unrelatedto the ref~gee
facility.)This would -includethe incrementalcost of
establishingthe tentcamp, rent (ifany,),and camp
operations,
2. Ship/Guantanamo Costs: DOD would pick up ship and
Guantanamo costsexpect the cost of actualrefugee
processingwhich would be picked up by State/INS.
o This would carryus through FY 1994. If theseexpenses
carryintoFY 1995 we would look again at the formula.
John'spoint,as no doubt he'ltellyou, is thatDoD can'
pick up any migrant processingcostswhatsoever;otherwise,itlosesitscredibilityon the Hillwith regardto peacekeeping
as a whole. That would leave us holdingthe whole bag, which
is a huge problem in terms of both equityand hard-nosed
accounting. Somehow, we'e got to find a way to avoid the
politicalproblem you'erightlyvery concerned about and also
the problem thatStateis alreadybearingan onerous burden of
budgetarycuts and policyresponsibilities.
To be continued,...
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06834890 Date: 12/28/2020