[Page 1]
{ O 68$ 5 j $ 7 IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
DZCI,: 10/25/00 RELEASE IN FULL
DECLASSIFIED
Clinton-YeltsinOne-on-One
Hyde Park, NY
October 23, 1995
11:30 a.m.-l:35p.m.
Note takers: Talbott,Ryurikov
{At outset,during opening pleasantries,PresidentClinton'suggeststakingjacketsoff -- "This is a working meeting, afterall."A waiterbringsin a trayofdrinks. Yeltsindowns in a singlego a
largetumblerof soda water.)
WJC: One thingwe did outsidewhen we talkedto thepresscoming in -- and thatwe should continueto do -- is prove the newspaper punditswrong.
They want to writeabout a big blow-up. Let'disappointthem. We'e accomplisheda lottogether.We'e allbut ended the possibilityof nuclearwar...
BNY: {interrupting)Yes, and we'e ended the Cold War.
C And on Bosnia, we'e worked togetherto achieve
a peace thatcannot come about unlessthe U.S.and Russia work together.
Y: I'm gratefulto you for creatingthe conditionsfor thisimportantdiscussion.All the world--inthe former Yugoslaviaand in Europe buteverywhere else,too -- is countingon us. I
come here with a sense of opportunity.But Ialsocame with a lotof anxiety. Everythingwilldepend on what you and I agree to. We
can'tletour partnershipbe shatteredby afailureto agree. We have to findsome sortofcompromise --a littlefrom your side,a littlefrom mine -- and then we can shake on it,righthere. We need to end the discussiontoday withan agreement. Ifwe don'tagree,it'lbe a
scandal.
I agree. But beforegettingliketo talkabout a generaland thathas been causingme
along the same linesas your
to specifics,I'
concern thatI have
some anxiety,maybe
own. I'm concerned
N DI
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 2]
g 0 6 g 3 g j g 7=IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
N DIS
about the misinterpretation--perhaps on bothsides--thatevery disagreementwe have is thebeginningof the end, or maybe the end of the
end, of our abilityto work together.Some
people aren'ttoo sorryto see thishappening,or to presentthingsthatway. For example, I
have the feelingthatwhen discussionof Bosnia
and NATO is takingplace,thereare forcesinthe U.S. and in Russia thatexaggeratethe
problems between us because they need forthose
.problemsto be there. It'spartlyold habits
dying hard, partlypure politics.
. We have extremistelements in our Congress who
are unhappy that,with the end of the Cold War,,
they don'thave a big enemy to kick around anymore. They need, emotionally,to have an enemy
out therein orderto conduct theirlivesanddefineour foreignpolicyagenda.
And I have the feelingthatin your country,
when we'e having legitimatediscussionsabout
how to livein the post-ColdWar world, some
people believewe want to deny you accessto
your properplace in world affairs,or accesstomarkets,or otheraspectsof the roleyou want
and deserve. There'sno truthto thatsuspicion.It'scertainlynot what I want.
Y: You'e right,but it'not justthat. In
general,thosepeople say, "Yeltsinhas sold outto the U.S. and to Clinton--Yeltsinand his
government are panderingto the Nest and
forgettingabout the East." That'swhat ourextremistsare saying.
C: Well, we'e got to deal with thistogether.We'e got to make the forcesof freedom and
democracy strong,beat back our nationalistsand
extremists,who did so well here in the 1994
elections.
Y ~ Yes.
C: So I understandthe generalproblem. It'sa
biggerproblem for you than forme becauseRussia has been invaded twice in the pasttwo
centuries.During the Cold War, therewere two
nuclearsuperpowers,two ideologies;you were
clearlyin charge in one giantcamp of nat.ions.
DIS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 3]
gogBggj $ 7IED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
That was, in some ways, a simplertime. In this
new era,we'e got to work together;we'e gotto finda way to use our influencecooperatively,to solve common problems thatwill,ifwe'e not carefuland smart and
cooperative,sweep acrossthe world.
Y
~
I am so glad to hear you say allthis,Bill,because I have to say: somehow in the pasttwomonths, we'e gottenoff track. It'snotproblem between the two of us personally.Thereare no personalgrudges between us, no personalmistrust.But our countries,our governmentshave startedto work on oppositesidesof too
many issues.We'e been pullingagainst,eachotherratherthan pullingtogether.Somehow we
have to restoreour.personalrapportas thedrivingforcein the relationship.Otherwise,we'lhave a difficult,outcome. Your enemiesand my enemies sense what'sbeen happening,howit'been going wrong, and they'etakingadvantageof it,to your detrimentand to mine,with an eye to '96.
C What we both have to do is projectstrengthat
home, but at the same time projecta genuinesense of stabilityin the U.S.-Russianrelationshipand in the world. We have to (
restorethe people'ssense of confidenceandcalm about how we'e managing our relations.
Y: It'svery importantthatwe do thistogether.We'e got to consultwith each otheron
important.decisions,so thatpeople know thatwe
don'tmistrusteach other;thatwe'e inconstanttouch with each other;thatwe'econsultingeach other.
C' agree with that. Ifwe can justget throughthisperiod,I hope thatby earlynext yearyou'lget creditfor your economy gettingbetter.My experienceis thatthere'sa delaybeforepeople feelthe resultsof economic
improvement. But between now and then, we'e
got to steadythingsout~
Y ~ That' right.And I know thatlatein
'6,'ou'l
have a similardilemma. In the meantime,
we have to work in unison to help each otherinnext year'scampaigns. Otherwise,Congress and
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 4]
g068ggjg /IED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
NOD S
the StateDuma willtake advantageof ourdifferences.They'lsay in Russia, "Yeltsincan'tconduct a strongforeignpolicy."
I'm very gratefulforthe strongsupportyou'egiven me.
C''esupportedreform in Russia because we havean opportunitythathasn'tbeen presentedto anyof our predecessors--to createan undivided,.peaceful,integratedEurope, to addresscommon
problems.
Y: I agree. I stillthinkthatthe major thinghere is,we can'tlosecontinuouscontactforeven one day. You decidedto bomb Serbs. You
didn'tconsultwith Yeltsin--that'snot good.
You can'tcomplain about any actionI didwithout consultingwith you, at leastI can'thinkof any time I didn't'consultwith you on
something reallyimportantto you. The entirecountryand allthe politiciansjump to the'conclusionthatyou and I are on differenttracks,thatyou'emaking decisionson your
own, thatwe'e not in touch. We can'tpermitthisto happen. We have to stay in touch witheach otherbeforehand. Only aft'erwe'e taken a
jointdecisioncan anythingimportanthappen. We
can'tcreatethe perceptionthatwe''emakingdecisions,on anythingimportantwithoutconsultingwith each other.
C: In general,I agree,Boris;we'e got to stayascloselyin touch as possible.That doesn'tmeanwe'lalways agree,but itdoes mean we should
make sure we understandeach other. But on-
Bosnia, let'sreview the circumstances...
Y: (interrupts)Do you want to do thislaterwhen
we talkabout Bosnia, or do you want to do it
now?
C
~ Let'sstartwith Bosnia now.
Y ~ OK.
C: Our airstrikesagainstthe Serbs were covered
by UN resolutionsthatyou were partof; theLondon Conference was a key factor,and you werepartof that. Partof what was decidedthere
DIS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 5]
gp (8)g])7=IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
NODI
was the automaticityof the threatof force.
All thatwas partof why I didn'tcall,though
perhaps I should have.
But let'talkabout where we go from here.,Let'sdividethisintotwo parts.First,our
obligationto the restof the world to achieve
the peace --we have to emphasize to the world
thatfirstand foremost interestis how to make
peace. We'e got to take thisburden offthe
people of the Balkans and of Europe. So thefirstquestionis,how to make peace?
Y: (interrupts)I'dliketo outlinegeneralscheme
for how to do that. I'm in constanttouch with
Chirac,Kohl and Major via telephoneand
letters.They don'twork againstyou. We alsodon'twant to work againstyou. I discussedthiswith Chirac and he said,"Ifyou agree with
Clinton,then I agree,too." Here'swhat I
propose:
In Phase 1, we could have a conferenceof thethreeYugoslav Presidentsin Moscow to discussthe principlesand the importanceof thecease-fire.There would be no documents. Then
in Phase II,they can come to the U.S. for what
I guess you could call"proximitylove-making,"
which means more detailedwork on the'racticalissues.Then in Phase III,they go to Paris;in
Phase IU to London to talkabout refugeesorwhatever John Major seems'tohave in mind. In
Phase U, they could returnto Moscow in March
for an overallassessmentof implementation.
Also, let'sbe sure to finda rolefor the
Germans. J
The key thinghere is to coordinatethe pressure
on the Yugoslav leadersfrom variouscountries
and groups. We'e got to put them in a single
embrace from allof us.
As for implementationof the peace, we should
each have an area of Bosnia we'e responsiblefor. Russia would have itsown area,probably-
where the Bosnian Serbs live. And our troops
would be under an American general. We'e
agreed to that. But not under NATO --under an
American, okay, but not under NATO.
N DI
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 6]
(-Q 68)5j )7=IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
NODIS
C: Boris,let'stake theseissuesone at a time.Ifwe'e going to have a peace conferencein
Paris,it'important to have something in
London and in Russia,too. I agree thatthe
Germans should alsohave a role. I'm happy that
Ivanov willbe with Holbrooke next week.
They'e doing well together.They'eboth
strongnegotiators,working well toward.the same
goal.
I have no problem with a meeting in Moscow on
the 30th -- I likethe idea of you gettingthem
in a room and shaking your fingerin theirfaces
and saying,"You guys go to Ohio and negotiateseriouslythere,and meanwhile observethecease-fire."But the problem, Boris,is thatIzetbegovicand Tudjman don'twant to come.
There' a problem with Izetbegovic'health,and
Tudjman has a problem with his elections.
Y: I talkedwith Tudjman and said,"Let'smeet in
Moscow," and he saidOK. Nilosevicis ready, I
ask you to put pressureon Izetbegovic.
C: I'lsee Tudjman andI'ldo what I can.
But therecould be a
Izetbegovic.I justbest.
Izetbegovictomorrow, andI'ltryto get thisdone.
realproblem withdon'tknow. I'ldo my
Y: (waiterbringsin anothertrayof juicesand
soda water) Shallwe have a drink? Is thereanybeer'? (POTUS sends the waiterout forbeer.)
C The main thingis to have a major meeting inRussia in the next month. I submit to you that
I supporthaving an importantmeeting in Russiain the next month.,
Y ~
Very good. I'luse thisinformationon
Milosevic.
C Now, letme tryout on you an idea a lotof.my
people don'tagree with. Strobe here probablythinksit'a nuttyidea. I believethe formal
signingshould be in Sarajevo. Think about it.
The 20th centurybegan in Sarajevowith a
terriblewar startingthere;let'shave the
centuryend therewith the signingof a peace.
NODI
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 7]
C068$ 5j$ 7FIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
D S
Y: I suppose the problems are practicalones
--havingto do with the securityof such an
event,right? Well, I won't dismissitout of
hand.
C: Well, justthinkabout it.Anyway, I agree'that
we can announce thatthereshould be a meeting
in Moscow withinthe nezt month ifat allpossible.
Now, on implementation: I understandyour
problem about having your troopsunder NATO
command. I want you to letme explainmy
problem so you'lunderstandwhy American troops
must be under NATO command. In February '93,I
saidthatifwe could make peace in Bosnia, the
U.S. would .send itstroopsto help implement the
peace.
We want to do so too.
C: Yes. Now, here'smy problem. The only way I
can sellthisto my people and to Congress j'.sto
do itas the leaderof NATO.
In Somalia, U.S. troopswere under UN command
and we lostsome men. Itwas the worst moment
of my presidency...
Y: (interrupting)Here'show to divideitup:
Russian troopsin one sectorunder a Russian
general;U.S. in anotherunder NATO.
C: Not a good idea,Boris, First,We don'twant
thisto look likeGermany afterWorld War II,
Second, we may have to be in a positionof
having allto enforcethe peace againstalltheparties.There willbe sporadicviolence. In
thatcase we'lhave to deal with iteven-evenhandedly:thatcould mean, Americans
versusthe Bosnians;Russians againstthe Serbs.
Y: But not throughNATO. The Russian people have
an allergyagainstNATO.
C: OK, but we stillhave to plan forthe worst.
Say we send some soldiersto Tuzla because
they'egot the necessarytraining,equipment,
'and so on. We may have to deal with violations
by allthreesides. The perceptionthatallthe
NODI
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 8]
C068$ 5 j $ 7=IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
NODI
forcesare evenhanded is critical.That means
therehas to be unityof command. One way to do
thatwould be to have your forcesintegratedintoa singleNATO-led operation,with a highrankingRussian generalworking with NATO.
You' stillhave your own authorityas theRussian units'ommander-in-chief,justas I'e
had my authorityover our troops.,But itwould
have to be a single,unifiedoperation.
Now, ifthat'stoo hard for you, anotheroptionwould be to take Russia out from under NATO
c'ontrol~ We could do thatifRussia took on thejobs of heavy airliftand reconstructionnationwide,alsomine-clearing.Then any combat
would be incidentalto theirassignedand agreedtasks.
Y: {Takes a pieceof paper and startsdoing a
versionof the Grachev Option organizationchart,with parallelstructures.)Look: an
American generalover the whole thingwith NATO
and Russia separatebeneathhim. Itdoesn'matterwho the generalis. You'e got thisGeneral Powell who's very popular,I gather.
Maybe he could do it.
C e I triedto explainwhy two separateforcesdoesn'twork. Do you understandour Option II?
Y: Yes, I understand. The problem with itis thatitputs us in a subsidiary,secondaryrole.
C No, you' be in a crucialrole. These arefunctionsthatare crucialto the successof theoperation.Another thing,ifthey are doingthingsthatcontributeto the reconstructionanddevelopment effort,the world community can help
pay ~
Y ~
C ~
Okay, I see. But what'swrong with puttingRussian generalsand unitsunder the U.S.
general,and then have a separateforcefor
NATO't
won't work. Itdestroysunityof command.
Y'ell,then I'llose,personally,in '96 becauseRussia willbe under NATO.
C: Let'snot give up. Let'swork on this.But let
me ask you this,Boris:as a minimum, willyou
N DI
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 9]
(-O $ 835 j 37=IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2Q17-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
NODIS
agree to send two battalionsin to do
reconstruction,airliftand mine clearing?
Y: Yes, I agree. But let'sget Perry and Grachev
togetherin the next two or threedays.
(They break for lunch.Over lunch,the Presidentrestates,for the delegations,what Yeltsinhas
agreed to:at a minimum, Russia willprovidetwo
battalionsto do reconstruction,airliftand
mine-clearing'ina liaisonrelationshipwith
NATO. Yeltsinconfirms,with two caveats:one
thatthe Russian contributionnot be describedas "support"but as a "specialoperation";andthatSecretaryPerry and MinisterGrachev make a
good faitheffortto agree to Yeltsin's
"maximum," i'.e.,a largerRussian forceindependentof NATO.)
2nd conversation
Y: On CFE (a subjectthathe had not allowed to
come up at lunch),we fellintoa traphere.Because of the disintegrat'ionof the Soviet
Union, the flanklimitationshave changed
radically.We do not seek any benefitsoradvantages. The CIS makes the numericallimitsvery confused. I realizeyou'esupportedme on
changing the flanklimits.I ask you to confirm
no'w thatyou'lcontinueto move in thisdirection--which is especiallyimportant,sincewe face in November what we callin Muslim
parlancea "circumcision."
C: (laughs)Let me t'ellyou my hopes on CFE. As
you know, I feelyou'eentitledto some
relief.You asked me to get you a fixto the
map; I'edone so. With America leadingthe
way, NATO put togethera proposalthatmeets
your basicneeds. Itwasn'teasy to work thisthroughthe Alliance,but we did. Now we'ewaiting.for your reply. And time is a bigfactorhere. We'e got to get this,problemsolvedby November 17.
(Yeltsinhas Ryurikov go get the map that
Mamedov had triedand failedto produce atlunch.)
N DIS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2Q17-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 10]
(-0$ 835 j gpFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
N DIS
10
Boris,do you understand? I believeyou should
have relief,and I'eworked to get itforyou.
But we need to resolvethisby November 17 so
every othercountryacceptsthe principle.
(DesertWine is served)
Y: I don'tlikethat. It'stoo sweet.
C: The red wine we served at lunch was made on the
Russian River in California.That was in yourhonor.
C:
Oh, I likedthat!
A familydescended from Russians ismaking it.
Y: {Refuses the desertwine.) May I have a littleglassof cognac? (Note takeris dispatchedtotryto findsome. Fails.)
C
~ I'm pleasedwith the progresson nuclearmaterials,Al Gore and VictorChernomyrdin have
done a good job.
Yes, that.willhelp a lotfor the Moscow
conferencefor next spring.
C: Right, so let'sreleasethe statement,OK?
Y:
C
All right,but maybe my people should look at itfirst.
f
Your people have alreadyagreed to the text.It'sjustthe releasethat'sbeen a problem.
Y: Okay. No problem. {He says thisin English.)
C
~
Now, on reactorsalesto Iran,there,too, Gore
and Chernomyrdin are working a difficult,importantproblem, and they'edoing a good job.
Y: We'l closethisquestiononce and for all.We'e toldyou thatwe'e going to closethe
mines, the centrifugeand technology,so it'finished.
Ca There' stillwork to do. We'e concernedabout
expertise--we'e worriedthatthe Iranians,
using your expertise,willtryto develop
nuclearweapons.
N DI
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 11]
g068ggj$ 7IED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
NOD IS
We won't help them do it.
C: Let'sletGore and Chernomyrdin keep working on
this.
Y: (Firstfrowns, then brightensup.) You know,
Bill,thisformula --Gore-Chernomyrdin -- is sofashionable,so much to the likingof other
'ountries,
thatthey allwant to copy it.
C: Yes, it'sgood because Al and Victorcan getintogreaterdetailbut stillmake politicaldecisionsat a higherlevel.
Yes, and they alsohave more time to drinkwineand vodka than we do.
C
~
We should commit ourselvesto tryingto get
START II ratifiedthisyear.
Y." We willratifyit.That means we need to go towork on START III.
I passed throughParison my way here and Chiractoldme he would reduce the number of teststheyare going to conduct to three.
C Do you thinkyou and I can agree to a zero yieldtestban fornext year'?
Y Yes, absolutely.We'l sign it.And I'ltrywhen I'm in China to talkthem intoittoo.
C
~ That'sgreat. I'm seeingJiang Zemin tomorrowand I'lspeak to him about thisand tellhim
you and I have talked.
Y ~
Ifwe don'tpool our effortson thesenuclearproblems, we won't solve any of them. What- we
should do is establisha commission -- not a
Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission --but one withVelikhov on our sideand some distinguishedscientiston your sideand have them deal withallthesenuclearproblems includingtheeliminationof warheads.
Last,Bill,I want to say thatour partnershipremains strongand reliable.Even on toughproblems, likeBosnia, we'lfindsolutions.
Our partnershipis the most valuablethingto
OD
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-'l3804Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 12]
Co (8)5$)7=IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020
~ I'
DIS
—. 12
us. Not only do we need it,but the whol'e world
needs it.You and I might. leavethe scene,but
what we have accomplishedtogetherwillsurvive
as our legacy. This is the main theme thatwe
must develop between us: We'e together,Bill,
and Boris. (My s toboj--Billi Boris)
C: Ifwe can do that,itwillbe more importantthan any of the specifics.In the book thatI
gave you at lunch, I wrote an inscriptionsayingthatI hoped we could make permanent the
partnershipbetween our countriesthatwe
startedin World War II but thatwas interruptedfor nearlyhalfa century. The American peoplelikethe Russian people. They likeexchanges
and businessdealswith Russia. We have a
businessman in Arkansas who spends halfof his
time in Russia. We'e got to make thisrelationshipwork. Like a marriageor a
friendship,ittakesa lotof nurturingand
patienceand a determinationto get over the
hard spots. This meeting has helped us do that.
Y: That'sright.Contraryto the pessimisticforecasts,both in your countryand mine, it'
been a very good meeting. It'spreservedthepartnership,for the good of our childrenand
our grandchildren.
Y: Now our people have to get down to work. {K
rabote!)
On theirway to the exit,POTUS remembers that
he promised over lunch to get Yeltsinsome
cowboy boots thatwillfithim -- unlikethebeautifulTexas boots thatBush gave him at Camp
David, thatwere too small. POTUS asks Yeltsinto take offone of his shoes so he can compare
sizes. POTUS and Yeltsinexchange rightshoes-- and the fitis fairlyclose. They joke about
wearing each other'sshoes to the pressconference,but Shevchenko, the Russian protocolchief,in a near panic,persuadesYeltsinnot do
it,whisperingto his boss, "Boris Nikolayevich,
the presswillmake something unflatteringofthis!"
NODI
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835137 Date: 12/28/2020