[Page 1]
{ O6g f5828IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835828 Date: 12/28/2020
SERPM3258
NATO-Russ~ia "FutureMembership Question"
g6P+1 /c(~~
RELEASE IN FULL,::
The strategicgoal of the members of the Allianceisto
build,throughenhanced integrationand cooperation,a structure
for genuinelycooperativesecuritythrougho
Europe, to includeallcountriesb most especially
democraticRussia.
+'
Centralto thiseffortwillbe the continuingevolution
of NATO, as itadaptsto changing circumstancesand new security
needs, and the activeencouragement of greatercooperation,
coordinationand jointactionby NATO and Russia on behalfof
theircommon securityinterests.
--Most importantly,thereisno setlimitto thisprocess;
as both the European securitysituationand itsinstitutions
continueto develop,an evermore closeand comprehensive
ooperativerelationshipbetween the Allianceand Rus 'an
prove possible.
NATO-Russia "Voice on non-ArticleV Operations"
--As the needs of European securitymove towards greater
cooperativeefforton behalfof common securityinterests,NATO
willincreasinglybe calledupon to undertakemissionsin
additionto itstraditionaland fundamentaltaskof collective
defenseof itsmembers, as ithas in Bosnia.
As the members of the Alliancemade clearat their
January 1994 Summit, NATO willbe preparedto undertakesuch
missions,includingpeacekeepingon a case-by-casebasis,under
the authorityof the UN SecurityCouncil or OSCE.
Since then,the members of the Alliancehave opened up
the processesof preparingand participatingin such NATO
activitiesto non-members, and particularlyto Russia given its
importancein European security.They are committed to build
upon the example of closeand practicalNATO-Russia cooperation
setby IFOR/SFOR.
r
+i
ex ~LE~)
s~ I.
I /
In the contextof a NATO-Russia Charter'scommitment to
increasedcooperationand jointinitiatives,even as NATO and
Russia preservetheirrespectiverightsof independent
decision-making,members of the Alliancewould:
undertakeregularin-depthexchanges,which Russia also
'ouldhave a rightto call,on preciselythose security
issueswhere such NATO operationsunder UNSC or OSCE
authoritymight prove necessary;and
expand opportunitiesfor Russianparticipationwith NATO
in the planningof non-ArticleV peacekeepingand other
jointmilitaryactivities,includingCombined JointTask
Force (CJTF) missions.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835828 Date: 12/28/2020 r.~