[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 14 7 61 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 814 7 61 RED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021 
Memorandum of Conversation 
ti% 
I ,,N4 1, 
Meeting with Prime Minister Ehud Barak, Secretary 
Albright's residence, July 16, 199919:00 -10:30am.‘-• 
Participants: PM Barak, MGen Danny Yatom, Secretary 
Albright, SMEC Ross, A/S Indyk 
PM Barak explained that he believed there was a real 
opportunity for making a comprehensive peace. He expressed 
concern that things had dragged for so long that if we 
don't succeed now there could be a major explosion. He 
compared this period to the Ben Gurion's decision to 
declare independence in 1948 - we either have to climb to 
the summit or fall down but we cannot just stay on the 
cliff. 
He was aware of the difficulty of moving on all tracks 
simultaneously but that there might just be a ripeness now 
on the Syrian and Palestinian fronts that made it possible 
that Asad and Arafat would both decide to move for fear of 
being left behind. Usually when the Arabs came together 
they adopted the lowest common denominator hard-line 
position. However, it was now possible that competitive 
tensions could create a synergy that overcame the usual 
centrifugal lorces and made it possible to move 
simultaneously. We should move on the multilateral front 
as well to provide the "glue" for the whole process. The 
overall effort is to create an interdependence and respect 
for each other's interests. 
Barak said he is determined to proceed simultaneously. 
Whether we reach agreements simultaneously, however, is up 
to Arafat and Asad. He believes Arafat understands it but 
he is not sure Asad does. 
On the Palestinian track he noted that the gap between the 
most moderate on both sides on final status issues was 
still very wide. He felt the U.S. role would be critical 
but that we shouldn't be tainted by getting involved in 
judging every issue. It was important that the 
Palestinians feel the American position is closer to the 
Israeli position - this will help to generate flexibility 
on their side. If they think you are not behind us they 
will have no reason to be flexible. In particular, the 
U.S. should tell them that Israel has the right to 
determine its security and what it needs for secure and 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 814 7 61 F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021 
defensible borders. U.S. needs to take a strong stand in 
support of Israel on this issue. 
Batak said that he understood it was also important to be 
fair with Arafat. He intends to have a direct, discrete 
channel. He will keep the U.S. updated. [Note: According 
to Danny Yatom, Barak called Arafat on Friday evening to 
update him on his discussions with the President. He 
reiterated that he would fulfill all his obligations but 
that he wants to discuss his ideas for modifiCations with 
him. Everything would be done in full consultation with 
Arafat. He intended to do everything possible to reach an 
agreement by November 1999 (sic)-. By then it will be clear 
whether a breakthrough is possible. If Arafat wants full 
Wye implementation now, he will do it but he wants to 
discuss his ideas for doing parts of Wye together with 
other confidence building steps•. Arafat responded that his 
people needed to see some tangible actions soon. He was 
very thankful for the call.] 
Barak was very concerned about the psychology in Israel. 
He felt it would be impossible to mobilize support in 
Israel for what he wanted to do if the psychology took hold 
that Israel was shrinking and facing terrorist attacks at 
the same time; if it looked like Israel was giving up 
tangible assets and was receiving abstract promises in 
return. In these circumstances he expected the Likud would 
become active again in opposition. 
He believed Israel had to feel that it was acting from a 
position of strength and that As people felt strengthened 
not- weakened by the process. The people had given him a 
mandate because they knew he would not compromise on 
Israel's security. Israeli teenagers will be the ones to 
fight if it all fails. They must feel that he acted from 
strength. 
The U.S. can provide the glue. It can provide incentives 
to all the parties and help to create a synergy that will 
encourage everybody to do their part. 
Wye Implementation: 
Barak's concern related to the patchwork nature of the 
Palestinian territory if the FRD is completed. He felt the 
Palestinians should have contiguity so that they would have 
a physical definition of their entity. They needed to be 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 814 7 61 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021 
able to move freely without being checked by Israeli 
soldiers. He would abide by agreements signed by the 
previous government, including Wye, otherwise why go 
through the trouble of negotiating them. But he is 
concerned that if Israel completes Wye it would create an 
explosive security situation. Eighteen settlements would, 
be isolated. They can't be dismantled because it's part of 
the interim arrangements, so they have to be protected. 
This is a recipe for an explosion. So the best would be to 
agree that some of the painful parts of Wye should be 
integrated into the final status arrangements. With Bibi, 
Arafat might have calculated that he could not expect.to 
get any more land than what Wye gave him. But if he 
believes we're serious and we set a date of July 15 or 
September 15 for reaching a final agreement then he may 
agree with a partial approach. And if we don't reach 
agreement by then, the rest of Wye would be implemented. 
In the meantime, we would do some more from B to A as well 
as some of the C to B and create a more contiguous area for 
the Palestinians. 
The Secretary expressed her enthusiasm for Barak's 
determination to achieve a comprehensive peace. She said 
that it wasn't often that we get a second chance in life 
and this was it for the peace process. She emphasized that 
,nobody should have any doubt about our commitment to 
Israel's security and we would reaffirm that at every 
point. She noted that the relationship of trust we had 
built up with,Arafat could be helpful to Barak. It also 
helped to strengthen him and it was important that,he 
remain strong. Wye was an agreement that the U.S. had 
signed and could not walk away from it. 
Barak said that he fully agreed. If Arafat wanted Wye then 
he would get it. However, Barak would make it very clear 
to him that he would be taking on a huge responsibility for 
preventing terror and if he failed the process would be 
halted. 
The Secretary said that Arafat had had to live for a long 
time on promises and might not be content with more of 
them. Settlement activity would be a real problem for him. 
Barak said that he had made clear during the campaign that 
there would be no return to the '67 borders, no foreign 
army west of the Jordan river and settlements concentrated" 
in blocs. That means that in a final settlement some 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 5]
C 0 6 814 7 6 1:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021 
settlements will be under Palestinian jurisdiction or the 
settlers will have to move to the blocs. In the meantime, 
there will be no new settlements. There will be no 
priority or preference given to the settlements except when 
it comes to their security. Government decisions already 
implemented will have to stand. But any that are not 
implemented will be reviewed by a committee that is evenly 
split between left and right with the swing vote in my 
hands. That will enable me to decide. When Bibi engaged in 
settlement activity, every move was seen as a provocation. 
Some settlement activity in blocs might act as a lubricant 
to reduce friction as we move forward in the peace process 
without undermining the negotiations. 
Har Homa was a Rabin initiatilie. It's within the municipal 
boundaries. But it should be treated with patience. We 
shouldn't make it into a major issue. Ras al-Amud is 
different. We are looking into how to deal with itfrom a 
public order aspect. There are a lot of Jewish groups 
buying Arab property in east Jerusalem. It's not easy to 
stop them. If the Palestinians stop illegal building in 
east Jerusalem it'will help. E1 is necessary to keep Maale 
Adumim connected to Jerusalem. It was also a Rabin 
initiative. It's too late to change it. 
Smec Ross suggested that it was essential to create a 
private channel to talk to Arafat about these issues. 
Rabin was able to get him to acquiesce because he trusted 
Rabin. On Har Homa, Ross emphasized the need for a package 
deal in which some Arab housing needs were addressed. He 
would have to talk directly to Arafat about it. Barak said 
he -fully agreed. Ross suggested he should think-about a 
package of actions he could take on Wye as well. And it 
would build Arafat's trust if he began a private channel 
discussion of final status issues. Perhaps Barak should 
meet with the negotiator Arafat designated. 
The Secretary suggested he should also release prisoners. 
Barak said he recognized that releasing prisoners was part 
of the reconciliation process. He had asked that 
categories of prisoners be prepared. Releasing murderers 
was going to be very difficult and emotional for the 
Israeli public. He could explain why he wasn't insisting 
on collecting every illegal weapon; same with the numbers 
of the Palestinian police. But releasing murderers would 
be a problem. He emphasized that it was essential he be 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 6]
C 0 6 814 7 61 F1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021 
allowed to give what he could to Arafat directly. We 
should not mention it to him. 
Syria: Barak said he was aware of Rabin's four legs. His 
list was wider: full withdrawal (although he said he didn't 
say it); normalization; security and early warning; 
timeline; terror; Lebanon; and economic cooperation. He 
understood there was interrelation between all these 
elements. 
He said that he had been around at the time that Rabin had 
initiated the pocket and he knew that Rabin never thought 
we would convey it to the Syrians. 'He thought the 
President would tell Asad that Rabin was serious and 
understood what his needs are. The point of the pocket was 
so that the President would understand that Rabin was 
serious. If all his needs were met then he would consider 
full withdrawal. Maybe it was a mistake to do it this way. 
The June 4 '67 lines are not relevant. I checked with our 
professionals. The only recognized border is the 1923 
international border. 242 has two elements: withdrawal 
from occupied (not "all the occupied") territories and 
Israel's right to "secure and defensible borders." It's - 
not reasonable to begin a negotiation by playing the only 
tangible card because once Asad has full certainty of full 
withdrawal he has no incentive to negotiate. If we were 
starting in 1993 it would be different. But will all the 
experience Asad has had of the Israeli position, he should 
have enough basis for coming to the negotiating table even 
if he doesn't have the exact nature of the border. 
Barak said he was looking for a creative formula, maybe "we 
will resume in order to complete the process, begun in 
Madrid. We are aware of previous discussions and we won't 
ignore them." Barak said he did not want to jeopardize 
his support at home. He had already put the Golan settlers 
on notice. Asad will have to decide. If he wants a 
settlement the door is open but on condition that there is 
no written commitment. It will not be politically viable 
if Barak looses his credibility on security. And he will 
lose it if the first thing he does is to give away the most 
important piece of security Israel has. 
Ross said that the US never communicated anything to Asad 
that Rabin did not expressly authorize. He had been 
meticulous about that. Barak said he would be able to 
check with Rabin in another thirty years. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 7]
C 0 6814 7 6 1:l ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021 
Ross said that Asad will ask the Secretary straight out 
about the pocket when she goes to Damascus. She will have 
to have an answer. Barak said that we would discuss it 
before she goes. 
The Secretary and PM discussed dates for her trip and 
agreed on the third week of August. 
Barak said he would update the Arab leaders on his return 
and he would visit London, Paris, Berlin, Moscow and 
Morocco in the next few weeks. He wanted to keep them all 
involved with appropriate roles because they could help. 
Then he would have to have a discussion within his own 
party and governfilent to prepare the ground and gather 
support. That will take time. It was important to lower 
expectations of immediate results by setting a time frame 
of, say, fifteen months - September 13, 2000. 
Barak thanked the Secretary for her help on the Geneva 
Convention meeting and applauded the U.S. role in Kosovo, 
which sent a strong signal to all dictators that when they 
crossed a certain line, the U.S. would react forcefully. 
Barak asked the Secretary to do all she could on the MIAs 
and Ron Arad. The Secretary said she would take it up in 
Damascus. 
Barak said he would like to complete the MOU on assistance 
but if he cut aid by $30 million it might jeopardize his 
ability to act. He was on the verge of making a major 
' attempt to put an end to the conflict. There would be a 
need for large financial support. If the standard is set 
at $30 million it could hurt the ability to mobilize.the 
funds later on. Indyk explained that the $30 million was 
very small in comparison to the $1.2 billion Israel would 
receive as a result of Wye implementation. The Secretary 
said that she understood there would be a need for a larger 
package but that it would be helpful in the meantime if 
they could agree to the frontloading because the State 
Department was in a real financial bind. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814761 Date: 05/04/2021