[Page 1]
CQ 68/$ cI 84FIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835984 Date: 12/28/2020
82-83-1993 18:24PM FROM Br ookeiStrobe TO 6471811 P.81
/
To: Ross Wilson S/S February3, 1993Cc: Tom Donilon, PeterTarnoff
Sorry not to have gottenback to you earlieron yourmessage about the Saturdayseminar,but I was at the WhiteHouse untilearlierthisevening,and I was then unable toreach you by phone on my returnto the Department.
RELEASE IN FULL
I realizeit'sa bitearlyin my new careerforme to
be showing signsof insubordination,and of course I'lmake
my besteffortto followthe new marching orderson the pro-
gram ifyou reiteratethem. But I would likeyou to consider
a couple of points:
--On outsiderparticipants(Billington,Iegvold,etalia):When Tom Donilon assignedthistaskto me at the endof lastveek, he made quiteclearthatoutsidersvere ggt ap-propriatethisearlyin the game. I was given to understand--and I agreed viththe point— thatitmight have an in-hibitingeffecton the discussionto have people from outsidethe government, sinceofficialparticipantsmight worry thatthe outsiderswould drav inferencesabout the driftof policythinking.Are we reallyreversingourselveson this'?
You say in your note thisissupposed to be "my
shov"; well,ifthat'sthe case,then I justvanted you to be
absolutelyclearin your mind thatthe proposed castofbriefersisnot justsomething the system churned up: itreflectsmy personalsense of the bestway to proceed.I'm
prepared'tostandor fallin my handlingof thisventureon
hov the proposed briefersperform.And, by the vay, I willbe
an activeparticipantin the proceedingsmyself.
— On the levelof insiderswho are to providethebriefings:Itisone of my goals in my new job to involveworking-levelpeoplemore in the making of policy— arid in.
the shapingof the top policymakers'hinking,notablyin-cludingthe Secretary'.That goal is,I believe,very much
in keeping vithone of the themes that,the Secretary,the
Deputy Secretaryand Brian allstruckat the meeting this
morning about reorganization,and it'spartof what I'm
tryingto do by making ISCA the core of my own staff.In put-tingtogetherthe program for Saturday,I have made an effortto identifyand assemble the bestpossiblepeople in the De-
partmentto addressthe issueson the agenda. My purpose hereisnot justto send a signalto the troopsand raisetheir
morale (althoughthat'spartof it);rather,my overriding
purpose is to make the very bestuse of the Secretary'stime
and fulfilthe taskgiven me as successfullyas possible.If
ve were to follovyour injunctionrequirethatthe briefers
be assistantsecretariesor higher,I feel,quitecandidly,thatthe briefingswould not be as knowledgeableor as
stimulatingas allof us want.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835984 Date: 12/28/2020