[Page 1]
C O 6 814 6 4 1 lED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021 
THE WHITE HOUSE 
WAS H I N GTO N 
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION 
7069 
SUBJECT:  Meeting with President Eduard Shevardn'Ae 
of Georgia (U) 
PARTICIPANTS: U.S. Side 
DATE, TIME 
AND PLACE: 
RELEASE IN FULL 
The President DECLASSIFIED
Samuel Berger, Assistant to the President 
for National Security Affairs 
James Steinberg, Deputy Assistant to the 
President for National Security Affairs 
Steve Ricchetti, Deputy Chief of Staff 
Strobe Talbott, Deputy Secretary of State 
Kenneth Yalowitz, U.S. Ambassador to Georgia 
Steven Sestanovich, Ambassador-at-Large to 
the New Independent States 
Carlos Pascual, Special Assistant to the 
President and Senior Director for Russian, 
Ukrainian, and Eurasian Affairs 
Peter Afanasenko, State Department 
interpreter 
Jonathan Elkind, NSC Director, notetaker 
Georgian Side 
President Eduard Shevardnadze.
Irakli Menagarishvili, Foreign Minister 
Tedo Japaridze, Ambassador to the U.S. 
Gela Charkviani, National Security Advisor 
Archil Gegeshidze, Presidential staff 
September 23, 1999, 2:43 - 3:28 p.m. 
Oval Office 
President Clinton: Congratulations on the award you are getting 
tonight [the Averell Harriman Award from the National Democratic 
Institute). It's a great honor and a great organization. Last 
year they gave the award to me and others involved in the 
Northern Ireland peace process -- to everyone who did not get a 
Nobel prize for that work! (U) 
d) 
X5, X6 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, 
A/GIS/IPS 3/2/2020 
•-) 
Reason: 1.5 (b, c, 
Declassify On: Xl, 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 14 6 41 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021 
SECRET 2 
President Shevardnadze: Thank you very much. I am very proud 
to join those who have already received this award -- you among 
them. Thank you also for meeting with me. I know how difficult 
it is for you to find time. (U) 
President Clinton: I always have time to meet with you. (U) 
President Shevardnadze: Well, if we exist at all, it's because 
of your assistance. +G4--
President Clinton: We want to continue that. Tell me how you 
are doing and what you are facing. 1.C,L 
President Shevardnadze: Today we are already a state. We were 
not until recently, but the foundations of our democracy are 
firm. Our constitution is similar to yours, and if anything can 
help us, it is that. The social situation is not good, and the 
Russian crisis continues to affect us. But again and again your 
assistance helps us. I thank you for the funds that you have.. 
proposed to your Congress. I was on Capitol Hill today, and the 
people I met with confirmed that they support us. 
We have parliamentary elections ahead, and then the presidential 
elections come. Our northern neighbors are hoping to have an 
influence on our elections, but we are not afraid. We have a 
good parliament -- good young people. I am thinking of running 
once more myself, in order to complete the job. I want to bring 
reforms to the stage where they are irreversible. Some good, 
very young people are coming to the fore now. Your ambassador 
and Strobe Talbott can confirm this. -(-C--)-
I want to say a couple words on the crisis that has swept our 
country. It has happened mostly because of the Russian 
situation. We have mostly overcome it now. Our government 
cooperated so well with your Embassy and the experts from your 
Embassy. We got out of the crisis, and the revitalization of 
the economy started again. 
The second issue I wanted to talk about is the Silk Road 
including the gas and oil pipelines from Azerbaijan and 
Turkmenistan. I remember clearly how you supported the western 
route for Caspian oil [the Baku-Supsa Early Oil pipeline]. It 
has now proven itself to be the shortest, cheapest, most 
reliable line. Now the fate of the main export pipeline is to 
be decided -- the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline -- which is of 
interest to American companLes. There is also the Trans-Caspian 
Pipeline [for gas]. Mr. Wolf was recently in Georgia, and I am 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 3]
C O6 8 14 6 41 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021 
3 
slightly worried about the tempo of that work being dragged out. 
I am very concerned that Turkmenistan not turn to Iran because 
of these delays. 1'64. 
The second competitor is the Russian company [Gazprom]. We are 
receiving lots of pressure from Russia to allow the transit of 
gas to Turkey via the Caucasus. This would actually make the 
Turkmenistan pipeline questionable because there is not enough 
--demand. We are trying to handle this the right way to the 
greatest extent possible, but not all elements of this depend on 
us. We realize that this is not just a question of pipelines. 
It is also a matter of our independence. 
I think your Congress has done a good job in its work on the 
Silk 'Road, and the Caucasus and Central Asian countries welcome 
this. They need an alternative so they are not bound to Russia. 
Ukraine also welcomes this effort, also the Balkan countries. 
So this historic development is closely associated with your 
Administration. I, for one, personally remember how many times 
you were personally involved to make the new Silk Road a 
reality. tei--
Now the third topic I want to raise: I want to thank you 
because Georgia is now capable of protecting its own borders. 
Russia did this previously, but part of your assistance goes for 
this work. We do not have a single Russian border guard now. 
We control our own borders. ttl 
And our cooperation on security matters is also developing well. 
It is not cooperation on a grand scale, but it is very good for 
a starting level. The only area where we are vulnerable is 
airspace management. But we believe that what is being planned 
for Eastern and Central Europe could also cov.er us. You know, 
we have a 'good" northern neighbor, but we still have to be 
vigilant. (winks) -(72-1-).-
I am very concerned about what is going on in the North 
Caucasus. We have refugee flows coming across our border. We 
have our own too -- 300,000. Some of the new ones are going to 
Azerbaijan as well. Knowing Russia and the Caucasus, I feel 
Russiajwill be mired in this crisis for a long time. (1:,)__ 
President Clinton: How would you address the problems in the 
North Caucasus if you were in a position to do so? 44---
.President Shevardnadze: It's tob late already. They have bled 
the place out. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 4]
C06814641=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021 
SE 4 
You know, this all started with Abkhazia. Who fought us there? 
The Chechens got their first military experience there. They 
were encouraged by the Russians to come .down, and fight. We went 
to Chechnya and said, "This will boomerang on you." Separatism 
in one region moves quickly to another. I also predicted what 
has now happened in Dagestan. 
--President Clinton:  How much of a challenge are you facing from 
terrorists crossing your territory to get to Russia?. The people 
who have been blowing up buildings -- do they have any problems 
getting to Russia from Chechnya? When Putin was here a few days 
ago, and also when I spoke not long ago with Ivanov, they said 
they thought they would close the border with Chechnya. 
President Shevardnadze.:  That's just a theoretical statement. 
They cannot even seal their own border with Chechnya. And if 
they are thinking of sealing their border with Georgia. ... .....crer 
President Clinton: No. The idea was to aeal their own border 
to stop the flow of people from Dagestan. .L.C.4-
President Shevardnadze: They can seal the Dagestan-Chechen 
border, but it's practically impossible to close the Chechen-
Russian border. There are.tens of thousands of Chechens living 
in Moscow and elsewhere in Russia. -teT 
About two million people from the North Caucasus were exiled to 
Turkey after the war. During the Second World War, Stalin sent 
all of them back to Kazakhstan and elsewhere in Central Asia. 
That was how they resolved the ‘Caucasus Problem." Then 
Khrushchev brought them all back. This is a very big part of 
their experience -- whatever the latest emperor wanted to do ' 
with them. -.+Q.4 
I truly think any solution must start in Abkhazia first. Why 
not give an example of peaceful resolution of such problems? 
They [the Russians] can do so, but their psychology is 
different. They want to hold leverage over Georgia. They do 
not want Georgia_to look to Europe and the West and the United 
States. But this is all very naive, very short-term thinking on 
their part. SZ 
You know I welcomed your actions in Kosovo. This is not because 
I want the same kind of action but because of the precedent that 
ethnic cleansing and genocide cannot go unpunished. I said this 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 5]
C06814641=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021 
5 
again this week at the General Assembly. What you did is the 
only solution. And it's a good example. -121) 
Russia should have been the first to support NATO's actions. 
Now they have problems in Dagestan, and their view changes --
they start talking about 'aggressive separatists." 
President Clinton: Yes, the shoe is now on the other foot. +et 
President Shevardnadze: Their biggest mistake after the end of 
the Cold War was not to move closer to the,West. This would 
have made things entirely different. What they did is just pure 
Russian ambition. fei-
I apologize if I have bored you with all these stories about 
Russia.  
President Clinton: Not at all. (U) 
President Shevardnadze: I have laid all this out so you can 
visualize what kind of neighbor we have. Without your support, 
we would have been swallowed. That's why your support for the 
Silk Road is so key. 1'6.1, 
One more thing I would like to raise: we have solved the border 
guard issue, but we still have the Russian bases. We want to 
solve this calmly. We have decided to ask them to withdraw from 
Georgia -- two bases, one in Abkhazia and one near Tbilisi -- in 
the next four or five years. This is our plan. (er 
President Clinton: First, I want to say that I know what great 
difficulties you have faced, and I am very appreciative for what 
you have done, and for what you said earlier about your 
constitution.` Where you live is indeed tough. We see you as a 
pillar of democracy. That's why these people are giving you 
this award tonight. -1153... 
Others may be tempted to cancel or rig elections in the period 
ahead. But with,all you face, to go through with democratic 
elections is so significant not only for Georgia but also for 
'all the others. You are a symbol for all the others. iG4_ 
On security, I hope you will .succeed in getting the Russian 
bases out. I am glad we have been able to work.with you -- not 
only on the security and sovereignty of Georgia, but also on 
your personal security. But I also worry about the potential 
for terrorism in the next five to ten years. With all that is 
SECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 6]
C06814641:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021 
6 
on in Chechnya and Dagestan and Abkhazia, I fear this will pose 
a great threat to Georgia. j,s-
I am glad to hear your economic situation is getting better. 
Higher energy prices may actually play a positive role here; 
Russia will be on more solid footing. It may also accelerate 
the pipelines because the companies always delay when prices are 
low. This may be true especially for the gas line. (C) 
My country is a big importer of oil and gas, but I still thought 
it was good when the prices rose because I knew this would make 
it easier for the companies to build the pipeline, and it means 
good things for Russia, Nigeria, other African countries, and 
our Middle Eastern allies. I thank you for all you have done on 
the pipelines•---tr-,-
We did not yet talk about the problems between your neighbors 
Azerbaijan and Armenia. I am very disappointed that we have not 
made more progress in resolving this. That's a pity for both of 
them because in a funny way they need each other. I. hope you 
can do what you can on this.  
On economics, one last thing: I know that the IMF has been 
insisting on a more vigorous reform program, including a better 
tax system. I also know you have parliamentary elections 
coming, and I know you have a tough economic situation through 
no fault of your own. We want to see the pro-reform candidates, 
whom you spoke about so profoundly before, win. But as soon as 
possible after the elections, you have to get back on this 
reform program. I want the IMF to continue their program, and 
the IMF wants to help. This is about greater confidence for 
foreign investors; this is about hope. (C) 
President Shevardnadze: Two words. There is some movement 
among the Caucasus states. Our three parliamentary speakers 
have met. The three Prime ministers met. There was a major 
Silk Road conference in Baku, and for the first time an Armenian 
Prime Minister came there. Now there is discussion of a meeting 
of the three presidents. Our advantage is that we have good 
relations with both, so we can help. 4G+ 
The conflict is absolutely unacceptable to us, to the Europeans, 
to you. Right after this visit, I am going to Armenia and will 
give your ambassador a readout after the trip. 
On the fiscal failure, we started our work on the debris of the 
old system. The firSt task was to form a state -- the means to 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 7]
C O6 8 14 6 41 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021 
overcome the chaos. When we have lacked our own resources.to 
get the job done, we have gotten foreigners to come in. We got 
the British firm for the customs service.' In our energy sector, 
the whole electricity grid of Tbilisi is operated by an American 
company. This creates jobs for Georgians. There are only about 
three or four American employees; the rest are Georgians. 
Your Ambassador knows that our number one problem is corruption. 
We couldn't address it properly before because we were not a 
state. Now, in mid-October, I will make a big announcement on 
anti-corruption. -(-C--)—
President Clinton: That's very good. (U) 
President Shevardnadze: You know, I was just thinking: I have 
been here in the White House twenty-two times. During the 
Reagan years, it was two or three times a year -- very intensive 
discussions. .I say this because Georgia has become one of the 
best examples of corruption. And corruption is a cancer. --(-C-}--
President Clinton: It eats the heart out of a society. People 
do not want to work. Russia will pay a terrible price if they 
do not fix this problem. Those [corrupt] people have so much 
power:. 
President Shevardnadze: Yes, Russia is probably the richest 
country in the world in terms of its natural resources. It 
takes a lot of talent to bring such a country to its current 
state. That's corruption. ye) 
President Clinton: We will do all we can to help. xi 
President Shevardnadze: Thank you for all the help in dealing 
with the terrorists. We will soon have set up a very 
interesting anti-terrorist center. 1.64., 
I have taken up a lot of your time. (U) 
President Clinton: No. I love it. I am hungry for information 
from you about the region where you live. And I find that I 
never learn anything when I am talking. .(U) 
President Shevardnadze: I hope you may come to the Caucasus 
soon. (U) 
President Clinton: I would love to. I have tried to be a good 
partner to the forces of freedom. Let me know how I can help 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021

[Page 8]
CO68146 41 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021 
ECRET  8 . 
while I am still here in offiCe. You know, I want to see 
progress on the Armenian-Azerbaijan dispute, and on the 
pipelines, so that both of 'our successors can have a more stable 
world -to deal with. ' The everyday challenges that we all face 
are enough, even without having to deal with corruption and 
terrorism. (C) 
President Shevardnadze:  Thank you. (U) 
End of Conversation 
SECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06814641 Date: 05/04/2021