[Page 1]
I„Q Q 8 g Q 94 2 IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835942 Date: 12/28/2020
RELEASE IN PART
B6
February 16, 1993
To: Rich Kauzlarich
From: StrobeTalbott--To pxepaxe me fox'ybx'eakfastw/ Nunn and Lugartomorrow morning (Wed.), would itbe appropriateto ask ISCA
to put together1) a background paper forme on the Nunn-
Lugar Act, legislativeand provisions;2) a statusreportonwhat'sbeen done w/ the money so far;3) a paper of some kindfrom PM or A (T) on how they plan to engage in the processofimplementingN-L from here on out; and 4) the Nunn-Lugar
CODEL tripreport.I'lneed thisby the closeof businesstoday. --Apparentlyhas OMB has rovisionalltaken a bigwhack out of our proposed FY '94 FSU-relatedbudget request,knocking the increaseover cuxrentfunding levelsfrom $ 311millinto $ 11 million.I gatherthatthisOMB decisionhasgone, officiallyat least,only to CliffWharton and BrianAtwood; I alsogatherthatTony Lake knows about itand ispxepaxed to back us up in axguing for the originalfigure.What can we do to move quickly,ifnot preemptivelyto fightfor our position'?--Toby Gati had a very good, very friendlyconversa-tionw/ Larry Summers yesterday.She was using the occasionto fillhim in on the lunch we had w/ Fyodorov. Together,they come up with the idea of tryingto reach an immediatebreakthroughon the matteryou discussedby conferencecall
w/ Coxrigan,the DepSec, Summers, et.al lastweek --thebanking assistanceprogram (Isit$ 6 million?)--and tellingFyodorov beforehe leavestomorrow, perhapswhen he meets w/Tony Lake, thatthe program isgoing ahead. This would be apoliticallyusefulgestureto make to Fyodorov, as the keygood guy in the Yeltsingovt, and itwould give him somethingto take home w/ him. What do you thinkof thisplan? Ifyouthinkit'sa good idea,what can we do today to make ithap-pen? Do I recallcorrectlythatthe hangup isw/ AID? Shallyou and I talkto Amb. Michael?--A sensitivepersonnelmatter,on which I droppedthe balltwo weeks wo...Nick Burns mentioned to me thatvery much wants to come intothegovt and work on FSU assistance.Among otherthings,sheneeds the work. I realizethisisa tad tricky,but I'dverymuch liketo accommodate ifpossible.My thoughtwould be tohave her come in and talkto us; ifwe findthe prospectplausible,we'd ask Tom Simons to do whatever he can to bringher aboard when he comes aboard himself.What, do you think'--Attached isa non-paperfrom Lukin, complainingabout the stalling-outof negotiationsw/ the previousadmin-istrationover how to use $ 5 millionin FREEDOM Support Actto supportRussian basicscience.As you'lsee from my noteto Larry,I'dliketo be in the positionto give Lukin a rep-ly, in the same non-paperform, when I have lunch w/ him andBurbulison Friday.
B6
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835942 Date: 12/28/2020