[Page 1]
0 6835 j $ 4 IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020
NODIS CHANNEL 9519890
DIST
101020
S
S/COS
D
S/P(Z.O
S/NIS
(E.O.)
s/s
DECAPTIONED
M~~N~I
DECL: 10/20/02
MEMOPWNDUM FOR
FROM:
SUBJECT:
THE SECRETARY OF STATE
WASHINGTON RELEASE IN FULL
iDECLASSIFIED
THE PRESIDENT
Warren Christophe
Your Meeting with Boris Yeltsin
Strobe has justreturnedfrom Moscow. He and I
have put our heads togetheron a recommendation for
how you might deal with Boris Yeltsinin Hyde Park on
Monday.
Bosnia willbe the principaltopicof the
meeting. Yeltsinwillno doubt, as he has in thepast,tryto setthe terms,tone and objectivesof thesessionat the outset.He willwant to go straighttothe issueof implementationand his need forRussia to
be a "fullpartner."He willcome loaded forbear on
thatsubject.Our recommendation isthatyou wrestle
him back to the more immediate and germane subjectofthe negotiationsand sketchout for him your conceptof the forthcomingpro::imitypeace talksat
Wright— PattersonField. I would take time to make
sure he appreciatesthe care ve have taken to providethe optimum settin.-.forthe ta'lks(conferencecenter,hotel,separatefacilityforeach delegation,golfcourse-forwalking, privacyand security)
That way you willconvey a sense thatyou'edealingwith firstthingsfirst.Italsogetstheconversationstartedon a subjectwhere your views are
congruentwith Yeltsin's.Only afteryou'eestablishedboth the priority— — and difficulty--ofachievinga peace should you lethim raisein depthhis concern about how to implement an agreement thatis not yet in hand. And even then, we would recommend
thatyou resisthis effortto forcea decisionon
Russia'sroleor to investthe meeting with
make-or— break urgency.
Strobe'sdiscussionsin Moscow (he was therewith walt Slocombe, Dick Holbrooke, Wes Clark, Jim
Collinsand Sandy Vershbow) shed some lighton what is
NODIS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 2]
CO683gj $ 4IFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020
D
likelyto be Yeltsin'smindset and strategyat Hyde
Park. The lasttime you saw Yeltsin--threemonths
ago --he was worried about the Balkan war and whether
Russia would be dragged in. Now he is worriedabout a
Balkan peace and whether Russia willbe leftout.
This problem is coming to the surfacebecause of the
successof the initiativeyou launched in the summer.
Untilnov, the imagery of the shuttlediplomacy has,
by and large,met Russian politicaland psychologicalneeds. The Contact Group servesas the board ofdirectorsof the peace process. This week's CG
meeting symbolizedRussia'sstatusas a full-fledged
member. The proximitytalksin Dayton willdo the
same, sincethe Russianswillbe there,on an equalfootingwith the British,French and Germans.
But now thatthe issuehas arisenof what nev
structuresand arrangementsare requiredto implement
a settlement,Yeltsinhas new an..ietiesabout.Russia'sstatusand prerogatives.As you know (and as he willtellyou again),he facesoppositionfrom criticsacrossthe politicalspectrum who are e..ploitinga
wounded sense of .nationalpride. To bluntand deflecttheseattacks,Yeltsinhas publiclyexcoriatedKozyrev
(theprincipalwhipping boy of the nationalists)and
is likelyto engage in quitea bitof tub-thumping,no
one-pushes-us-aroundrhetoricin his UN speech. If
Russia seems in any sense to have been demoted from
itsseatat the head of the tablein the Bosnia peace
process,Yeltsinfearshe willbe even more of a
targetforhis enemies.
So one word you villhear on Monday is"equality"--equal treatmentfor.'Russiain the design
,and conduct of the implementationeffort.Another is"impartiality"--meaning fair,or evenhandedtreatmentforthe Serbs. Itisone of the many
perversitiesand perilsof the Balkans thattheprincipalaggressors'inthe conflictand the principalperpetratorsof ethniccleansing,market massacres,
and otheroutragesalsohappen to be Russia'straditionalfriends.The Russiansacknowledg'ethe
misdeeds of the Bosnian Serbs but complain thatwe
turna blindeye to what they regardas the almostequallybad behaviorby the Muslims and, even more,
the Croatians. Hence ithas been extremelydifficultfor Yeltsinand his government to acquiescein the useof forceagainstthe Serbs. That wi,llbe no lesstrue
when thereis a peace to keep --and to enforce.
NODIS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 3]
go 68$ 5 j 3g IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2Q20
Yet enforcementis essentialifa settlementisnot to unravel. Otherwise,the currenthopefulmoment
willgo the way of numerous earlierdoomed
cease-fires.NATO isthe only organizationcapableofundertakingthattaskon behalfof the internationalcommunity. -IfRussia is going to participate,,inthemilitaryoperationin Bosnia, itwillhave to be incooperationwith NATO --and on certainbasicterms.Otherwise the effectivenessof the enterprisewillbein jeopardy,and so willthe safetyof the troops.
The issueof Russia'srolein IFOR is alsoa
more specific,immediate versionof the issuethathasbeen most contentiousand time-consumingbetween youand Yeltsinforover a year. The lastfour times youmet --September lastyeax in Nashington,December inBudapest,May in Moscow and July in Halifax--,you andhe grappledwith the questionof Russia'srelationshipto a transatlanticalliancethatisnot only going toremain a fi..turein the post-ColdWar world, but thatisgoing to definefor itselfnew missionsand take in
new members. Of those four encounters,Budapest isobviouslythe experiencewe'antmost to avoid,whilethe Moscow meeting --though nerve-rackingand fax.
from smooth-sailing--offersthe model we might hopeto replicatein Hyde Park.
Before you went to Moscow in May, Yeltsinrefusedto lethis ministerspre-scriptthe meeting.
He reservedto himselfthe rightto make the keydecision--whether to authorizeRussia'sfullparticipationin the PartnershipforPeace --on thespot,once he had a chance to look you in the eye andtryto talkyou out of your commitment to NATO
enlargement.'here
are similaritiesthistime. BillPexry,Strobe and I have triedto work out a solutionto theRussia/IFOR problem in advance, but our counterpartshave saidin so many words thatthisis one fortheix.boss to resolve.with our-boss.
The principaltaskthatYeltsinhas set.himselfforHyde Park is to persuadeyou to acceptanarrangementthatgrantsRussia equality,at leastwiththe Britishand French ifnot with the U.S. itself,inthe implementationstructuresand, in particular,indecision-makingon the use of forceagainsttheSerbs. He is likelyto put forward a versionof a
proposalthatPavel Grachev has pressedon Bill Itwould shiftthe focus of decision-makingfrom the NAC
to an ad hoc internati.onalcouncilin which Russia
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2Q20

[Page 4]
go 68$ 5 j 3g IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2Q20
would have the rightto approve in advance the use offorce--and to block any actionitdoesn'.like. The
Russiansdeny thatthey are askingfora veto,but.
theirproposed organizationchartsand the
accompanying explanationsmake clearthat,de factoatleast,thatis,what they want and thatiswhat they
would get.
- Bill,Strobe,Walt, Dick, Wes and I have all,inour own contactswith the Russians,impresseduponthem thatany such scheme isunacceptable.We haverepeatedlyand emphaticallytoldthem our bottom line--which is a red line:IFOR willbe NATO-led; itwillpreservethe unityof command and the primacy of theNorth AtlanticCouncil as the sourceof politicalguidance. Quite apartfrom the deadly effectcompromising on thispointwould have on the Hill,itwould allbut guaranteethe paralysisof the operationitself.We have triedto reassurethem thatIFOR willbe evenhanded among the parties.
Itis an open questionwhether we can reconcilethose irreduciblerequirementsand Russia'sneuralgia,as Yeltsinput itin an interviewhe gave Frenchtelevisionthisweek, about puttingRussia "under theaegis"of NATO.
BillPerry laidout a proposalto Grachev inGeneva two weeks ago, and Walt and Wes amplifieditin
Moscow lastweek. Itwould give Russia,along withothert.roop-contributingcountries,a chance toparticipatein planningand to e..aminethe plan inadvance of itsapprovalby the NAC, afterwhich Russiawould decide whether itwanted to-be partof theoperation.Itwould give Russia a chance to consultwith NATO in working out the rulesof engagement and
on the conduct of the operation'once ithad begun.
.. And itwould respectand protectXeltsin'prerogativesas commander-in-chief:he, or his
commanders, could opt out of any aspectof theoperationof which they disapproved. They could not,however, preventNATO actionfrom going forward inaccordancewith itsown comman'd-and-controlprocedures.
That lastpointhas been the principalstickingpointso far,and itmay continueto be fora longtime
Ifitproves politicallyimpossiblefortheRussiansto integratetheircombat unitsintoa
NATO-led IFOR, we have suggestedto the Russiansan
alternativearrangementthatwould requirethem only
~~ NODIS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2Q20

[Page 5]
COQ8$ 5] ggIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020
DIS
to establisha "liaison"relationshipbetween theirunitsand ours. Under thosecircumstances,theRussian contingentwould have to be relativelysmall
and itwould have to be confinedto non-combat
functions,such as mine-clearing,constructionprojectsand airlift.
There isalsoa thirdoption:Russia does not,participatein IFOR at all,but remains actively
engaged in the other,non-militaryaspectsofpeace-implementation,such as economic reconstruction,,resettlementof refugees,and organizingandmonitoringof elections.
Yeltsinis likelyto argue thatallthreeoftheseproposalsare humiliating--the firstbecauseitputs Russia "under" NATO; the second because itputs Russia in a minor supportrole;the thirdbecauseitleavesRussia out of the main actionaltogether.
He willmaintainthathis acceptanceof any one wouldbe politicalsuicideforhim and devastatingto thebeleagueredcause of Russian reform --much as heargued in May that,he would be riskingnot only his
own fortunesbut the futureof reform itselfbyagreeingto a PFP relationshipwith a NATO thatwasbent on expansion.
He will,in short,once again come at you as onepoliticianto another. In May, pleadinghis domesticpoliticalvulnerabilities,he firstasked foramoratorium on new members untilthe year 2000, thenfortwo years,then practicallybegged foryou to makea publicpromise thattherewould be no.expansionin'96. This time he willask you .toliftyourselfabovethe narrow-mindednes'sof your advisersand cut aspecialdeal with him on the spot on Russia/IFOR so asnot to jeopardizeallyou'eaccomplishedtogetherandallyou can do in the future.
Ifthatis indeed his opening gambit, you canparryit,much as you did in May, by a combinationoffour tactics:1) holdingfirm to the basicsof yourposition;2) expressingpatienceand determinationtofindcommon ground and manage any differencesthatcan'tbe resolved;3) reiteratingforhim thelonger-termstrategicobjectivesthatundergirdyourpolicywith respectto the issueat hand; and 4)matching him in your willingnessto engage him as onepoliticalleaderto another In May, afterlisteningto him go on about how difficultNATO e..pansionwas
for him at home, you talkedabout the competingpressureson you, and you made the case thatyour own
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 6]
(-068/5]g4 FIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020
N D
positionon the subjectwas motivatedby a visionof
European integrationratherthan any hidden desireto
containor weaken Russia.
A similarapproach may be effectivenow. The
uphillstruggleyou are waging with Congress to secure
politicalsupportand funding for IFOR is evidenceof
the risksyou are takingforpeace in the Balkans. In
rebuttinghisproposal (assuming itis a variantof
Grachev's)and in explainingwhy you can'tcompromise
on unityof command or the primacy of the NAC, you can
make the very practicalargument thatany other
arrangementsimply willnot work. We'l be back in a
dual-keysituation--this.time with Russia holdinga
key; IVOR willfailin itsmission,and the parties
willresume fighting--a prospectthatYeltsinhas as
much reasonto fearas we do.
,You have one impoxtantadvantageover the
situationthatprevailedin May. Then we were up
againsta realdeadline. The Noordwijk NAC
Ministerialwas lessthan a month away. IfRussia did
not sign up forPFP by thatmeeting, the:impassethat
had developedthe previousDecember --and thatwas
dramatizedby Yeltsin'sblow-up in Budapest --would
have riskedbecoming open-ended,perhaps permanent.
There is no such deadlinethistime, and Strobe
and I ~ould recommend thatyou push,back hard against
any attemptby Yeltsinto forcethe issueon Monday.
The Pussianscan accepteitherOption I or II whenever
they are ready --once a peace settlementis signed;
afterIFOR is alreadydeployed;or afterthe
parliamentaryelectionsin December. Or they can go
forOption III.We'l make the bestof whatever they
decide.
But we are alsopreparedto continueworking
thisproblem, at alllevels.ln thatsense,thereis
an Option IV --no decisionat allat Hyde Park — and
that'scertainlybetterthan Option III.Our military
expertsare talkingmore intenselythan ever before,
and they should keep doing so, working the
organizationchartsand the maps, comparing doctrines
(inmoments of candor, Russian officersagree that
unityof command is crucial). This isa high
politicaldecision;'but,as you suggestedyesterday,
some agreement between militaryleadersmight open the
way for a resolution.
Naturally,justas you made clearin May and
willwant: to reiterateon Monday thatNATO e..pansion
goes forward ("deliberately,transparently,no faster
~HtS-'&NOD IS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 7]
C068$ 5jgg IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020
N D
or slower than alreadydecided"),you should make sure
he understandsthatthe planningfor IFOR is goingforward rightnow, and Russia'sinvolvementin that
planningwillto a significantdegree depend on its
prospectiveinvolvementin the operationitself.But
thatis a factorfor Yeltsinto includein his own
calculations.What he needs to know from us is that
the door isopen; it'shis choiceon when, or whether,
to wal'k through. And even ifhe does not acceptourinvitation,he should not turnhis back and walk away.
In thatsense,too, your encounterwith him
Monday willbe of a piecewith thoseyou'ehad overthe pastyear on the largerrelationshipbetween
Russia and NATO: the ultimatequestionis whether
Russia chooses integrationor isolation.Whatever
choice iteventuallymakes, itwon't finallymake up
itsmind soon or unambiguously. . Rather,Russia willcontinuefora long time to ditherand vacillateand
agonize on the threshold,sometimes huffingand
puffing,sometimes steppingtentativelyforward. The
challengefor us --and forour allies,who are often
swayed by Yeltsin'spublicblasts-- is to maintainsteadinessin our own policy;to.keep the door open,
and to make sure thatthe terms forentranceare asclearand cogentlyargued as possible.
~%%ST NOD IS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835134 Date: 12/28/2020