[Page 1]
C',O 683$ 9$ 7=IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835957 Date: 12/28/2020
February7, 1993
Rich Kauzlarich
EUR frontoffice,6th floorStateDepartment
BY HAND --PERSONAL
RELEASEIN FULL
Dear Rich:
A point— I'm sure alreadyentirelyclearto you--
has crystallizedin my own thinking,Ifyou agree with it,
and ifthey are indeed going to be joiningus, I d appreciateityour sharingit,with Bob and Lynn simply by showing them
thisletter.
Our fulfilment-of the interagencyfunctionthathas
been assignedto us isgoing to depend on our abilityto make
our NSC committee truly--and as exclusivelas ossible-the sourceof optionsand recommendations forthe President.This means two things,one positiveand one negative.It
means seeingto itthatthe subgroupsgenerategood ideasinthe most thorough,timelyand persuasiveway possible;and it
means deterringthe otheragencies,particularlyDefense and
Treasury,from bypassingor leapfroggingour committee intheirown effortsto get FSU-relatedideasto the President
and to drivedecisionsdownward. We'e got to win over theindividualsat DoD and Treasury,convincingthem thatthey
can play and starby being on our team; and we'e got to en-
listour NSC colleagues,Tony and Sandy especially,in block-
ing end runs.
1
This boilsdown to a tough, criticalmandate forBob
and Lynn: as I thinkabout our operationand theirpartsin
it,itisclearto me thatthe essenceof each'sjob descrip-tionisto master the substanceand processin theirareas
and do everythingin theirpower to steerthingsthroughour
committee.As faras I'm concerned,the more they can do
themselves,the better.I was immensely impressedFridayby
the way Bob handled the matterof the subgroup on economic
initiative— how he explainedto me the wisdom of Nick's
takingon a coordinatingfunctionand threw himselfintohar-
ness with Nick to get started.That seems to me a model of
what I'm talkingabout here.In short,I'm not,so much
propoundingan injunctionto Bob and Lynn as acknowledging
thatthe penny has dropped in my own noggin and promising
them they.'llhave my supportand gratitudeifthey seizethesebullsby the horns.
In Bob's case,the trickiestmatter,as we'e.dis-
cussed,isgoing to be keeping Summers on board and under
control.That means strokinghim when possible,bonking him
(or having Tony bonk him) when necessary.Italsomeans hav-
ing someone who can play,substantively,athis level,which
Bob can and I can'.
1
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835957 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 2]
QG 683/957 FIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835957 Date: 12/28/2020
While Bob has to deal vitha single-warheadheavy
missile,Lynn has to deal vitha NIRV: Wisner, Allison,Carter,Halperin,Warner and God knows vho else.Lynn should,at the earliestpossiblemoment, pay a courtesycallon his
namesake, Under SecretaryDavis and, sayingthatI asked him
to,get her to recountforhim the wonderful,touchingpower-
play thatFrank put,on forus in Tarnoff'sofficialoffice
(minus Tarnoff)Fridayafternoon.
Lynn probablyalreadyknovs Jim Timbie and Bob Ein-
horn prettywell.They are going to be essentialto him and
to us, sincethey'egot the match the DoD team in throv-veight.(I'm incorrigible,aren'tI?) He should alsospend
some time with Rose G. (vheneverI do that,you can assume lcan'tremember the spelling)at the NSC and figureout how he
and she can duplicatewhat Bob Fauver and Nick have alreadylaunched (OK, undertaken)in the economic area.
I can tellthata good deal of my own energy isgoingto go intomaking the committee vork. Bob and Lynn are goingto be absolutelyessentialin that,respect.
I'm vritinga lettermaking the appropriatepointsto
Toby and Nick on allthis.Obviously,it's1004 in theirin-terestthatve succeed.Early in the game, I'lhave a sit-
dovn with Tony. But I'dliketo hold offon thatuntilI see
how we do on our own. That'spartlybecause Tony put theproperstructurein placeto begin with and seems, along with
Sandy, to be backing us vhen necessary(e.g.,vithLaxx'y on
two occasionsalready).
Tom Pickeringwas good enough to come to my house on
Saturdayafternoon.We had what I consideredto be a terrificconversation,includingabout the importanceof the inter-
agency dimension to my job.He, too, isgoing to be vitalinseveralways. I'm confidenthe and his colleaguesin the em-
bassy willbe the sourcenot justof reportingand analysisbut of good ideasforus to advance to the President.
Speaking of good ideas,I thought,Tim Wirth had a
number thatve should follovup: upgradingengagement with
Russia (and some of the otherNIS) on energy;a nature-for-.
debt deal forthe Far East.Think about ways to followup on
that,,woxking as closelyas possiblewith him. He's looking
foralliesand ideason which he can give meaning to hisnew
job. Let'sfigureout a vay to be help him do that--chan-
nelinghis ideas,with fullcreditto him and participationvithhim, throughour committee.For example, let'sget him
thinkingabout being an invitedprincipalat one of our full
committee meetingsas soon as possibleafterhe'sconfirmed
and has some concretesuggestionsthatwe can then work
thxough a subgroup,presumably with Energy and, what? EPA?
Commerce? I don'tknov vhetherthisshould be primarilyin
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835957 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 3]
Co $ 8/59//=IED LI.S.Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835957 Date: 12/28/2020
Bob or Lynn's area.Let them flipa 5 kopek pieceorwhatever.I'ementioned thismatterin my letterto Toby and
Nick.
Finally,I'easked Galitto spend some time in my
transitionofficethisveek going throughthe vastamount of
paper thathas accumulatedunattended.She villcullthe
resumes. You might vant to glancethroughthose and see ifthereare any thatwe might use in some fashion.While our
ovn staffis (I hope and pray) alreadyset,theremight be
otherarrangementsve can make to plug intotalentand expe-rience.Two names come to mind: Mike Joyce,vhom I'm sureyouand Lynn know well and who has writtenme; and Mike Stafford,
who was Nitze'saide and isnow a part-timerof some kind forGeneral Burns.
See you in a veek. Thanks foreverything.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835957 Date: 12/28/2020