[Page 1]
Co 68/5j g 9IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835149 Date: 12/28/2Q20
ORIG SEC/PRES TO NSC VIA 4pm
courier,6/12(rjd)
NODIS 9511103 RELEASE IN FLILL
DIST:
6/12 per S/S(GALLIVAN)
S
S/COS
D
P
T
EUR
SNIS
SP
s/s DECAPTIONED
DE CLASS IFI ED
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON
June 12, 1995
DECL: 06/12/00
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM
THE PRESIDENT
Warren Christopher
SUBJECT: Your Meeting with YeltsininHalifax
Your meeting with Yeltsinwillbe relativelybrief--about.an hour. The scheduledoes not permititto expand the way your one-on-onedid in Moscow,
where you ended up spending nearlythreehours withhim. ThereforeI recommend thatyou focus your sideof the conversa'tionon one objectiveabove allothers:establishingthe basisfox an agxeement. on
conventionalforcesin Europe (CFE) thatwillhead off
a showdown between Russia and the West laterthisyear.
Your successin bringingYeltsinto agree to a
new Russia-NATO relationshiphas opened the way tobegin a new stagein cooperationbetween Russia and
the Alliesin shapinga new securitysystem for
Europe. But, that'pportunityis at riskifRussiafailsto work with us to pxeservethe CFE treaty.That agreement remains at the very core of thesecuritysystem in Europe, and any threatto itrisksthe foundationfordevelopinga stablemilitaxybalance.in Europe. Yeltsinmust be broughttoundexstandthatto disxuptthe CFE .treatywillriskmajor Russian politicaland securityobjectivesand
willundermine the sharedobjectiveof integrationthatyou and he are working to achieve.
N DI
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835149 Date: 12/28/2Q20

[Page 2]
g06835gg 9IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835149 Date: 12/28/2020
Our goal is to convinceYeltsinthathis largerpoliticalinterestsare more importantthan his armed
forces'arrowmilitaryones. The Russianmilitary
has made clearthatithas no intention(and, itsays,
no ability)to withdraw enough militaryequipment from
the Caucasus regionto be in compliancewith CFE's
so-calledflanklimits--constraintson what equipment
- can be deployed insideRussia near itsborders--when
they come intoforcein November. Flagrant,defiant
noncompliance could triggera crisisin Russia'srelationswith the West. As a sweetenerforthebulletwe want him to bitethisfall,we'e preparedto seek alterationsin the CFE map, grantingRussia
some additionalflexibilityon what itcan deploywhere. That'ssomething Yeltsinasked you for in aletterlastDecember. But we cannot get thosechangesuntilthe CFE review conferencenext spring,and we
can'teven tryunlessRussia has'adewhat we and ourAlliesregardas a good-faitheffortto be as closetothe flanklimitsas possiblein November.
This isnot an issueon which Yeltsinis likelyto be briefedin detail,nor does he probablycarethatmuch about the substanceof the matter (how many
armored personnelcarriershis commanders want in
which militarydistricts). All he knows isthathismilitaryhas been tellinghim: thatCFE was always a
bad treaty,a remnant of the Cold War "imposed" on theold USSR in a moment of Gorbachev'sweakness and even
more unfairto the new Russia;and thatthe flanklimitswillkeep the Russian armed forcesfrom beingable to "solve"Chechnya.
In largemeasure because of the connection
between CFE and Chechnya, we have to be especiallycarefulabout how farwe can go in accommodating theRussian desireforadditionalflexibilityunder thetreaty.You will,of course,want to reiterateourcontinuingcriticismof Russian heavy-handednessin
Chechnya.
In Halifax,the most promisingapproach is for
you to stayat a fairlyhigh levelof generalitywithYeltsin,engaging him on CFE as a politicalissueratherthan a military-technicalone. You should tryto get him to assentto two generalpropositions:first,thatRussia'sabilityto integratewith the
West willdepend on avoidinga major blowup over thisproblem; and second, thatwith politicalwillon hispartand yours,the diplomatsand militaryexpertsshould ableboth to preservethe treatyand to
accommodate new realities(thedisappearanceof the
Warsaw Pact and the SovietUnion).
~96&%%'-/NOD IS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. CQ6835149 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 3]
C068$ 5 j g glED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835149 Date: 12/28/2020
N DI
Afterinforminghim in broad-brushterms thatyou'epreparedto alterthe map next year ifwe ranget pastthe crunch thisfallsatisfactorily,.you needsay only thatan American delegation,led by LynnDavis, willmeet with Russian expertsa few days laterto presentthe proposedmap changes.
While Yeltsinwillbe neitherpleasedthatCFE
comes up nor preparedforany concessionsorcommitments on the spot,you should have some leverageon him. The two issuesthatare most on his mind--theNATO-Russia dialogueand his desireforan ever-biggerroleat futureG-7 meetings --relateusefullyto CFE. That isbecause the common denominatorof allthreesubjectsis integration,which he desperatelywants forRussia. You can make clearto him thathisstrategicvisionof a Russia thatispartof the Westwillbe jeopardizedifhe allows his militaryto putRussia in the positionof unilaterallyviolatingasolemn treatyobligation.
You succeededin Moscow in gettinghim to agreethatit.is in Russia'sinterest,as well as theWest's,thatNATO and Russia cooperatecloselyand inan institutionalizedfashionon European security.Likewise,he willbe reminded in Halifaxthatitis inthe G-7's interest,as well as Russia's,thatthe 7
findways of consultingand cooperatingmore closelywith Russia. That goal,too, requiresa degree ofpredictability,mutual trustand constancy. You canmake clearto him thatworking with Russia toward asolutionto the CFE flankproblem is a testof what'at stakein both of thoseotherenterprises.
Yeltsinshouldbe receptiveto thismessage.However, what he reallywants to hear from you is areaffirmationof the assurancesthatyou gave him inMoscow thatthe processof NATO expansionwillnotaccelerateduringthe months'head. He is a bitlikeHumphrey Bogart in his most famous scene, in Rick'Bar, saying "Play itagain,Sam." He needs to keephearingfrom you what will,and willnot, happenthroughat leastthe firsthalfof '6.It'spossiblethathe may come at you again with a plea fora"pause" or a "moratorium"on NATO enlargement. Butyou know the music and lyricsfordealingwith that:
NATO expansionwillbe neitherfasternor slowerthancurrentplans,which callfor a processthatisgradual,deliberate,transparent--no faster,noslower than alreadydecided. You can deliverthatmessage fairlybriefly,then urge Yeltsinthathe andyou not spend too much time going over ground thatyoucovered in Moscow; instead,you might get him to
/ NODI
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835149 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 4]
go 68$ 5 j g 9IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835149 Date: 12/28/2Q20
N DI
sublimatehis anxietyabout NATO expansionand
concentrateinsteadon the impoxtance of beefingupU.S.-Russianmilitary-to-militarycooperationand
givingnew substanceand emphasis to PFP.
In thisregard,as in others,itis fortunatethatyou willbe meeting with PxesidentChirac beforeHalifax. We have indicationsthatYeltsinis hopingthatthe new French Presidentwill,likeMitterrand,break ranks with us, the Britishand the Germans over
NATO enlargement. You willhave a chance to work out'
common strategywith Chirac in advance of Halifax.
When Yeltsinpressesyou for a biggerxole inthe economic partof next year' G-7, perhaps for fullmembership in a new G-8, itwillbe an opportunityfor
you to pound home the economic message thathe and
, Chernomyrdin most need to hear:staywithprivatization;accompany itwith de-monopolization;consolidatemacroeconomic stabilization;fightcrimeand corruptionas well as deficitsand inflation.These are allmessages thatthe Vice President-willbecarryingwith him to the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission
meeting at the end of the month.
In Moscow, you pressedYeltsinhard, and with
some success,on the issueof,fissilematerials.You
and he agree'dto put the matterin theGore-Chernomyrdin channel..Otherthan a passingreferenceto how you'ecountingon the Vice Presidentand the Prime Ministerto do good work on thatproblem, I'dsuggestthatyou not spend much time on
itin Halifax.
Similarly,you and he have put the prospectiveRussian saleof reactorsto Iranin the Gore-
Chernomyrdin channel. Yeltsinmay be unhappy thatwe
have been tryingto get the otherG-7 to reaffirminthe communique our common policyagainstnuclearcooperationwith Iran. You might note that,asYeltsinseeks closerpoliticallinkswith the G-7, heneeds to understandtheixviews on thisimpoxtantquestion.
NODIS
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835149 Date: 12/28/2Q20