[Page 1]
C0 6835 j Q3 IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835143 Date: 12/28/202Q
RELEASE IN FULL
Gore Debriefon One-on-One w/Yeltsin
Atmospherics:
At KrylatskoyeHospital,in sittingroom of BNY's suite.
Three chairsaround coffeetable. Gore in center,BNY and
Chernomyrdin on eitherside. Kremlin interpreteralso present.
Kremlin camera,crew and stillphotographerallowed in to shoot
photos at top of session. BNY in suitand tie.Nose stilla
littleswollen. No bandages,but some faintsubduralbruisingstillevidentaround nose. Looks basicallynormal.
Yeltsinvery friendly,animated,obviously"on bestbehavior."He clea'rlyhad as his objectivefor the meeting toput the whole Budapest thingbehind us ifhe could be 'satisfied
we had some minimal understandingon NATO. He displ'ayedsome
"ferociousness"at points,but "not likewhen he'sdrunk -- I'e
been through that."
NATO Expansion, Budapest:
Gore's Impressions: Yeltsinhad reactedto something BC
said in his speech at Budapest --probablywhen BC declaredthatthe "processof NATO expansionhad begun." This statementcause
a rhetorical,chemical reaction.BC's comment, combined with the
NAC language on 1995 caused an explosion. The Russians had
clearlymisread the NAC language on 1995 --eitherwillfullyorbecause they had been fed bad informationby the Europeans (some
combinationof the Germans, French and indirectly,the Poles).
The problem was compounded by Kozyrev; Yeltsinwent to Budapestlisteningfor bad news and thoughthe'dheard it.
Gore opens by tellingBNY how much he appreciatesthe
meeting and conveying BC's personalbestwishes for his speedyrecovery. He then gives his preparedtalkingpointson NATO
expansion. Gore said„ "look,the reasonwe were surprisedin
Budapest is thatin our heartswe didn'tperceiveany difference
between what BC tolkyou in Sepember and what he saidinBudapest." (EarlierYeltsinhad asked, "why did you change?")
"What Clintontoldyou in September was thateventuallyNATO
willexpand. But the processwillbe gradualand open and we
willconsultcarefullywith you. The processwillbe conducted
in parallelwith a deeping of the US-Russia partnershipand your
partnershipwith NATO." Gore then uses the metaphor of two
space stationsdocking,using his hands to illustrate.
Yeltsin".Da,Da. (He also startsmaking the docki.nghand
motions with his hands.) "Simultaneous."
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835143 Date: 12/28/202Q

[Page 2]
g068$ 5j4QIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835143 Date: 12/28/2020
Gore: "Yes. We need a processof threethings: our bilateralpartnership;Russia'srelationshipwith NATO; and NATO
expansion. ,Itmust be gradual."
Yeltsin: Yes, in parallel.Simultaneous,simultaneous.(He
then makes hand gesturesto indicateone space stationmoving
forward and the second moving away from it.)Not likethis.
means.
They then have a long discussionabout what "gradual"
Yeltsin: Since the NAC said 1995, "gradual"could mean 12
months.
Gore: No.
Yeltsin: Or itcould mean 10-15 years.
Gore shrugs,i.e."anything'spossible."
Yeltsinthen sought specificassurancesthatNATO wouldnot expand in 1995.
Yeltsin: When you come to the middle of 1995 and you need tosend a signalto the Poles to tellthem they are going to join,what willyou do?
Gore offersto tradetalkingpointswith Yeltsinso he cansee exactlywhat Gore was authorizedto say, i.e.,that1995
willbe a year of study and briefingonly. (At the end of theimeeting, they do exchange talkingpoints.)
Gore: We understandyou have parliamentaryelectionsinmid-1995 and itwould be hard for you ifwe moved forward then.I thinkyou have been given bad informationfrom some peopleotherthan us. We have no intentionof doing that,
Gore suggeststhey shake hands to sealthe deal thatNATO
willnot expand in 1995. They shake, but Yeltsinis a littlereluctant,thinkinghe should have sought more.
On next steps,Gore suggestsChristopherand Kozyrev begin
a processand he and Chernomyrdin willalso stayin touch on theissue. Yeltsinagrees.
Yeltsin: There is a second question, If you do this(expand
NATO), what isRussia'srelationshipto NATO?
Gore: Well, on one extreme, conceptuallywe have not ruledout.thatRussia could be a partof NATO.
Yeltsin: Nyet, Nyet. That doesn'tmake sense..(The
implicationhere is thatthisis improbable;Russia is very bigand NATO is very small.)
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. DepartmentofStateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835143 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 3]
QQ 6835 j Q 3IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835143 Date: 12/28/2020
Gore; I'ltake your word for itthatit'snot probable,but inthe processof consultations,we should seek to findthe verybest relationshipbetween Russia and NATO. Our goal is anundividedEurope and we must reach it.
Yeltsin: Agreed, but we may not reach our goal. Europe maybreak down intotwo blocs. What then willbe Russia'srelationshipwith NATO and Russia'srelationshipwith the U.S.?
Gore: Our friendshipis very important, No matterwhathappens, we willbe interestedin our partnership.
Yeltsin: That is very importantto us. If you mean that,whatyou have said is very important. (To the interpreter/notetaker,Yeltsinsays, "Write thatdown.") Great, I thinkwe canconsiderthisbehind us.
In reviewingwhat he willsay to the press,Gore asks ifhe can say "We had a misunderstanding,but it'sbehind us."Yeltsinsuggestshe not even referto itas a misunderstanding;justfocus on the strengthof the relationship.
COCOM'arlier, in the car enrouteto the hospital,Gore gaveChernomyrdin the listof our arms exportsto Saudi Arabia. Goresays, "On Wednesday, you suggesteda swap. I saidI'dtry. Igot itdone. I'egot the list.My people toldme to hold itfor a mutual swap when you give me the Iran information. Butyou are my friend;I trustyou." Chernomyrdin immediatelyaskshis aide for his briefcaseso he can puts the listaway in a
specialfolder,but he does not offerGore theirlistof exportsto Iran. Gore teaseshim: "I thoughtyou were reachingforyour liston Iran." Chernomyrdin asks Gore.ifhe plans to raise
CoCom with Yeltsin,Gore says, "No. I'm working on thatwithyou." Chernomyrdin says, "Good."
After they discussNATO, Yeltsinasks Gore, "What about
COCOM7"
Gore: I thinkthe Prime Ministerand I have found a way tosolve it.
Yeltsingives Gore an incredulouslook.
Gore: In September, you and PresidentClintonagreed Russiawould fulfillitsexistingcontractsto Iran,but you'd have no
new 'contracts.You'd get intothe new regime, subjectto ourbeing able to insurethatyour existingcontractsare not openended.
Yeltsin: Da. That'swhat we agreed.
Gore: On Wednesday, the Prime Ministersuggestedwe give you
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835143 Date: 12/28/2020

[Page 4]
g 0 g 8 3 g g g p =IED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835143 Date: 12/28/2020
informationon our Saudi contractsin exchange. I'ealready
given itto him.
Yeltsinand Chernomyrdin then talkheatedlyamong
themselvesin Russian. Gore asks the interpreterwhat'sgoing
on. The interpretersays Yeltsinis confirmingChernomyrdin gotthe stuffon Saudi Arabia and on thatbasisagreeingto allow
Chernomyrdin to give us the Russian informationon Iran.
Later,at the airport,Mamedov comes up to Gore and
Chernomyrdin and thanks them both for the "tacticalbreakthrough",saying "you'eunlocked it.-Now thatwe k'now
exactlywhat you .want, we'lget back to you on Iran,BW and
CW." Chernomyrdin pointsto Mamedov and says, "he'sgoing to be
handlingalotof the work of the Commission."
After the debriefon COCOM, TalbottadvisesGore thatLynn
Davis is under pressureto impose sanctions,but they would then
be waived for 90 days. A decisionmemo has been clearedinteragency.Gore says "For God's sake, do NOt impose sanctionsnow." Talbottreiteratesthatthey would be imposed but thenwaived. Gore says, "No, put itoff. I'ltalkto Lynn."
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Departmentof StateCase No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835143 Date: 12/28/2020