[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 59 0 6FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835906 Date: 11/17/2021 
Octotober 20, 1994 
PERSONAL 
EYES ONLY TO THE SECRETARY 
FROM STROBE TALBOTT 
Chris, 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Thank you for your call last night alerting me to the 
problem with the Bosnia passage of my speech. I've made the 
changes we discussed and will send back an "as-delivered" version 
today for appropriate distribution. Peter Tarnoff will be 
especially glad to see deleted the idea about building on the 
Contact Group. You might be interested that in discussing new 
European security architecture with Mamedov, as we did at great 
length yesterday, he raised a version of the same idea -- but 
with the important difference that we'd have to expand the Group 
to include the Italians, Canadians and probably others who have 
been beating up on him because of their exclusion from the 
current group. 
As I indicated on the phone, I am more convinced than ever 
that the Budapest CSCE summit is an extremely important 
opportunity for the President -- and, conversely, that it would 
be a serious mistake for him not to go. 
Along with Collins and Kornblum, I worked with Mamedov to 
develop an approach that builds on the great progress that the 
President and Yeltsin made in Washington two weeks ago. CSCE is 
absolutely key because the Russians are part of it (indeed, their 
Soviet predecessors were founding members). Therefore we can 
make the enhancement of CSCE part of a larger, inclusive, 
integrative context within which to lay the ground for NATO 
expansion. 
We can do this in a way that does not impinge on the 
independence and unique role of NATO itself, yet that does help 
us to avoid the "new divisions" problem that loomed so large a 
year ago September when we last grappled with the task. 
At issue here is not just Russia but Ukraine, the Baltics, 
the southern-tier CEE countries and several other former Soviet 
and Warsaw Pact states that will not be in line for early 
membership in NATO and whose own sense of security and whose 
eligibility for eventual full integration into the Weit must not 
be sacrificed for the sake of early admission for the Visegrad 
countries. 
A blunt but pertinent word about our domestic politics: If 
we get this right -- and at the right time, which means very soon 
-- we can seize control over this issue in a way that essentially 
takes it away from the Republicans in '96. That doesn't-mean 
1 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835906 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
c o 6 8 3 5 9 0 6 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835906 Date: 11/17/2021 
Poland will be in NATO by then. But it does mean we'll have a 
plan in place and a process underway that will make it difficult 
for anyone to attack the President for failing to deliver on his 
promises or for giving the Russians a veto over NATO expansion. 
In that sense, the December Budapest meeting is a perfect 
bookend for the year, rounding out what the President said and 
did on the subject of European security in January, when he 
unveiled PFP, committed himself to NATO expansion and laid out 
his vision of a Europe undivided. 
One more thing in the "pro" category: By December, we'll no 
doubt have been through a couple more perils-of-Pauline 
cliffhangers with Kozyrev & Co. over Bosnia and Iraq, and the 
Bi11-Boris relationship will need some face-to-face tending to. 
Finally, a word on the serious downside of his not going: 
the Euros, East and West, are counting on him to be there; 
Budapest is a very big deal for them; our President's absence 
would stir up concerns and criticisms about whether he is, in 
some sense, turning his back on Europe to concentrate on other 
regions (he'll have recently been to Jakarta for APEC and will be 
about to go to Miami). Yeltsin, according to Mamedov, will feel 
puzzled and let down. He thinks the President agreed to come "if 
there's important work to do" -- and it's hard to imagine more 
important work than putting a Clinton stamp on, and establishing 
the right direction for, the evolution of post-Cold War Europe. 
Putting it quite bluntly, Mamedov fears that a Clinton no-show at 
Budapest will be read by Yeltsin as a "retraction of his promise" 
to pursue a two-track evolution of Europe -- NATO expansion 
coupled with greater integration. Mamedov further believes that 
without the personal endorsement of President Clinton, our CSCE 
proposals will lose much of their value to reassure the non-V-4 
they have not been left behind by NATO expansion. 
My worst fear is that this will drag out; we'll keep 
everyone -- the Euros, Yeltsin, the CEE and FSU types -- all in 
suspense. If, as is likely, delay leads to a negative decision, 
our President will get doubly slammed for indecision and 
abdication on an issue on which he had earlier been out front; if 
he goes at the last minute, he'll get hit for indecision and 
improvisation, and we won't have laid the ground properly for his 
attendance. 
For that reason, I believe we should push very hard for a 
positive decision if possible BEFORE the Middle East trip. We 
are less than six weeks from Budapest, and we need every single 
day possible to prepare -- one way or another. 
As far as I can tell, the-correlation of forces on this 
issue is as follows: our Department, from you down, is in favor 
his going; Dave Gergen has been won over and argued strenuously 
2 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835906 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 0 6=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835906 Date: 11/17/2021 
at a meeting on Monday; Tony'was one the fence, and may have 
fallen off onto the wrong side; Sandy is, I think, in favor, but 
is not pushing it very hard; Leon Panetta is very, very 
skeptical; so is George. Their'problem, as I understand it, is 
that they feel the back-to-back Budapest and Miami trips would be 
just too much of a strain on the President, and would look like 
excessive foreign-policy travel. 
Other quarters that might be heard from: Leon Fuerth is 
strongly in favor and thinks his boss is, too. It might be-
necessary here to deploy the VP, but it would probably take your 
going to him and making the case strongly and urgently. This 
would be one on which I'd consider enlisting Vernon as well. His 
activity in the Bilderberg Group would probably dispose him to 
see the wisdom of the President's going. 
My sense, as I mentioned on the phone, is that this matter 
hasn't really been put to the President since he and Yeltsin 
talked about it during the summit. It's also my sense that the 
President would, if it were put to him in a fashion that allowed 
him to hear both sides, do what we consider the right thing. 
The strongest team we have interpally to flesh out both the 
case for the President's attendance and the plan for his 
participation is: Tarnoff, Davis, Holbrooke, Steinberg, Collins, 
Kornblum and Flanagan. 
I'll phone in from Oxford later today. 
3 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835906 Date: 11/17/2021