[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 5 8 7 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021 
9413200 
6/7 DIST 
D 
P-EO Tarnobb 
Donilon 
ARA-EO Watson 
SAH-EO Grey 
S/S [DECAPTIONED
1MrR-E5,04DIS 
DECL:OADR 
MEMORANDUM TO THE SECRETARY 
FROM: Strobe Talbott 
SUBJECT: A Week of Hemispheric Diplomacy on Haiti 
Osr dfi-‘3---
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
After visiting E1 Salvador, Jamaica, Venezuela, and 
Colombia and attending the OAS General Assembly in Brazil, I 
can report that our Haiti policy has an encouraging degree of 
support from other states in the hemisphere. While there are, 
of course, anxieties galore (many of which are similar to our 
own) and while some countries share our view more strongly than 
others, there is widespread agreement among our neighbors on 
the following points: 
o The status quo -- that is, the continuation of the 
Cedras-Francois-Biambey regime -- is unacceptable for three 
reasons: first, because_it represents a dangerous affront 
to the,hemispheric consensus on democracy; second, because 
it is perpetuating a human-rights and humanitarian 
catastrophe in our neighborhood; and third, because the 
crisis continues to generate refugees who impose a burden 
on our consciences and on our societies' ability to grant 
asylum. 
o Additional sanctions and stricter enforcement of 
existing sanctions are in order. 
o We need more cooperation on dealing with the refugee 
situation. 
o Once the three bad guys leave, a considerably expanded 
UNMIH will be required to protect the restored Aristide 
EECRET/N0DIS 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
10/14/2020 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 5 8 7 9-IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021 
"SteRETINODIS
-2-
government and the various international humanitarian 
workers, retrain and professionalize the military and 
police, and -- that all-important phrase -- "maintain 
essential civic order." 
In addition to rhetorical support from others, we've got 
some practical progress to point to: the Jamaicans have 
granted us a migrant processing center; the Turks and Caicos 
are close to doing the same; Bill Gray thinks he may even get a 
third such facility in the Bahamas; .and this afternoon 
(Tuesday), the OAS unanimously approved our proposal for an 
,expanded UNMIH. Yesterday (Monday), Aristide had agreed to put 
in a plug for UNMIH, using our proposed formulation, in a good 
speech he gave to the assembled ministers in Brazil. 
Hattie Babbitt and her colleagues did a splendid job in the 
corridors and the drafting sessions of the OAS in getting the 
language we wanted past the sensitivities and special pleadings 
of other delegations. Even the Mexicans, who are notoriously 
vigilant against any hint of tolerance for Yanqui strong-arm 
tactics and gunboat diplomacy, were, in the end, not just 
cooperative but compliant. So were the Brazilians. It was, 
ironically, the Canadians, who threw a spanner into the works, 
whdch, along with other wrangles, kept Hattie & Co. up until 2 
a.m. Tuesday morning, but we were able to get thein on board in 
the end. 
The next challenge will be for Madeleine and her team to 
take advantage of this momentum in the Security Council in the 
coming days: we now need a new UNSC resolution for the more 
muscular UNMIH. 
A new mandate for the mission will send a strong, tough 
signal to the bad guys in Port-au-Prince that pressure on them 
to leave is building, and it will also send a reassuring signal 
to the many Haitians who are nervous about Aristide's return. 
To that audience, UNMIH says that the international community 
will be there in force to help and encourage Aristide to 
restore his presidency in a peaceful, orderly fashion, with as 
inclusive a government as possible. 
Our government has given a lot of thought in recent weeks 
to the size and composition of UNMIH. A11 our colleagues with 
any experience of last year are determined not to repeat the 
mistake of the Harlan County. That means having an UNMIH that 
is up to the job; it must be sufficiently numerous and 
well-armed enough to deal with pockets of resistance even in 
what is otherwise a "permissive environment." The interagency 
consensus now is for a force of between 6,000 and 10,000, 
although perhaps half of that could be civilian. In any event, 
it will be an ambitious and expensive operation. However, I 
return from my trip with some hope that we will be able to 
-6,EreFtEf'7'NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 8 3 5 8 7 9 =IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021 
• 
--EFECRET7NOD I S 
-3-
recruit quite a bit of help from others. The Jamaicans, 
Venezuelans, Argentines, and Chileans all told me that they'd 
contribute; the Salvadorans and Colombians indicated they 
might, too, and there are other wells to which we can return. 
(I traveled with an outstanding Marine colonel from Barry 
McCaffrey's staff at SOUTHCOM, who is expert on what military 
contributions the various countries might be able to make if 
their political leaderships have the will to do so.) 
Lurking in almost everyone's mind -- notably including our 
own -- is the fear that despite our protestations of seeking of 
"peaceful, multilateral" solution to the problem, circumstances 
on the island could force the U.S. into a unilateral invasion 
of Haiti. If it comes to that, I believe a couple of countries 
might actually join us in that venture -- the Jamaicans 
probably, the Argentines possibly -- which would mean of course 
.that it would not be entirely unilateral. 
The Mexicans and Central Americans suspect that we're 
already secretly planning unilateral use of force, and that our 
current diplomatic campaign on behalf of UNMIH is a 
bait-and-switch scam, intended to sign them up for what will 
turn out to be a mop-up operation after we've gone in and 
kicked out the gruesome threesome. In fact, of course, we are, 
very quietly, contemplating what we've called a "Vanguard" to 
UNMIH in the event that other pressures and an ultimatum don't 
work. 
while there would be quite a bit of passive support for 
such an action, there would also be far more opposition, both 
during the event and afterward. The Mexicans and Centams, plus 
perhaps the Chileans, would take the position that theY'd been 
had. They would probably back away from any prior commitment 
they'd made to UNMIH and denounce us as well. 
There's also a lingering question about hOw we'd get any 
sort of UN blessing for Vanguard or even be able to justify it 
under international law. I'm not saying there's no answer to 
these questions -- just that we haven't come up with ones yet. 
Thus I come home more eager than ever to explore every 
possible means of forcing the Big Three to leave voluntarily 
(if that's not too much of a contradiction in terms). I had' 
several excellent conversations with people who know the 
individuals and the situation on the ground very well. I'll 
identify my interlocutors next time we talk, but I don't want 
to put their names to paper even here. Those discussions 
focused on the opportunity, which we've not yet fully explored, 
of, shall we say, behind-the-scenes activity intended to play 
upon the interaction of self-interest and distrust among the 
big three. That will require a higher degree of can-do spirit 
NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 4]
c O6 8 3 5 8 7 9 1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021 
—5TeREWNODU 
-4-
on the part of some of our colleagues from elsewhere in the 
government than has so far been in evidence. I will be 
attending a WH meeting on this subject tomorrow (Wednesday). 
One of the most difficult parts of this whole venture 
remains the management of Aristide. Bill Gray has done a 
terrific job in this respect. He gave Aristide a ride to and 
from Brazil for the OAS meeting and brought Aristide along on 
, the UNMIH language. 
This was no easy trick, since Aristide suspects --
correctly -- that a robust UNMIH is intended in part to keep 
Aristide himself in line, to deter him, or at least his 
followers, from seeking revenge against those who collaborated 
with the de factos. 
Another delicate issue looms ahead of us. When we are 
asked, as we are repeatedly by the Latins, how long the UNMIH's 
lease will run, we answer, "until February 1996." Everyone 
nods approvingly, knowing exactly what that means: that's when 
the Haitian electoral calendar calls for the inauguration of 
Aristide's successor (the constitution does not allow him a 
second term). 
Now, when Tony Lake and I called on Aristide in Washington 
on April 2, he affirmed his commitment to abide by that 
timetable. But all the Latins I met who know him well --
notably including Dante Caputo, who continues to impress me 
immensely --predict that sooner or later Aristide will suggest, 
or demand, that he be allowed an extension of his term to make 
up for the time he's spent in exile, or that he be allowed to 
run again, or both. 
I think it's interesting that he has not r)aised this yet. 
Perhaps his intent-ion is to see if' we're serious about getting 
him back, and,then prove by good governance (by being what Bi11 
Gray is urging him to be -- "Haiti's Mandela") that he deserves 
an extension. For the time being, at least, I think we should 
continue to operate quite explicitly on the basis of his April 
2 assurance to Tony and me -- that is, on the assumption that 
he'11 hand over the reins to a peacefully and democratically 
elected successor in February 1996. 
I made a detour en route home to stop in Bogota and meet, 
at his request, with President Gaviria of Colombia, who will be 
taking over as Secretary-General of the OAS in September. It 
was well worth the trouble. He is top-notch, and he had 
basically one message, which makes a lot of sense: 
We should start now, he says, to use all our influence on 
Aristide to get him to commit himself to broadening his 
political base. It's all well and good for him to talk, as he 
-SaGRZZINODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 5]
c O 6 8 3 5 8 7 9 1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021 
—SErAE-TAIODIS 
-5-
did in his speech in Brazil yesterday, about "reconciliation" 
and "justice for all" after he returns; but what he'really 
needs to do is start talking now about inclusive politics and 
coalition government. The immediate benefit will be to 
reassure those who fear that he'll return as the Pauper King, 
the hero and charismatic leader of the poor, an object of fear 
and detestation of the elite and the establishment. Aristide 
needs at least 'some support from upper-class Haitians. He also 
needs a significant number of those who now oppose him to 
change their minds and decide they can live with the idea of 
his return after all. If that happens, the political chemistry 
inside Haiti will change, perhaps inducing the de factos to 
leave. 
Furthermore, if Aristide does not have a coalition 
government, it will be hard if not impossible for him to govern 
within the constitution, because he'll need a parliamentary 
majority to confirm his prime minister and cabinet and pass 
essential legislation. By the same token, if Aristide does 
broaden his base, it will significantly diminish tension in 
Haiti. That would make the job of UNMIH easier and perhaps 
diminish both the size and the duration of the mission. 
I am well aware that there is a lot of troublesome history 
to this matter of Aristide's broadening his base and reaching 
out to what passes for the center in Haitian politics. It was 
over a version of all this that Larry Pezzullo's efforts came 
acropper. However, that doesn't mean we shouldn't try again in 
some form, since the success of the whole enterprise could 
depend on it. 
Working with Aristide on this is yet another tough job 
largely for Bill Gray. I'm going to be discussing with him 
ways to work this theme into his discussions with Aristide as 
well as with Aristide's supporters, particularly on the Hill 
(Bill testifies before Hamilton tomorrow, Wednesday). 
By the way, Yuri Mamedov decided to assign himself the task 
of serving as the Russian "observer" at the OAS meeting in 
Brazil. I had a good one-on-one session with him two nights 
ago down there, then gave him a lift back to Washington (via 
Bogota and Panama City) today, which gave me a chance to do 
quite a bit of business on P4P, Bosnia, crime and corruption in 
Russia, COCOM, war and peace in the Transcaucasus, G-7+1, and 
the Clinton-Yeltsin summit in September. I'll be seeing him 
again in June on the margins of Gore-Chernomyrdin, and I'd also 
like to make a stop in Moscow in July with Jim Collins and the 
summit planning team. Given your own heavy travel schedule, 
Bet.h and Toria are still negotiating a good week for me to make 
that trip. Mamedov's strong preference is for the week of July 
18. 
SECRET/NODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835879 Date: 11/17/2021