[Page 1]
C O 6 8 3 5 9 3 4-1 D U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835934 Date: 1V17/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
DEPARTMENT OF STATE 
WASHINGTON.
November 7, 1994 
—4K-R-EfINODIS 
DECL: OADR 
MEMORANDUM TO THE SECRETARY 
FROM: Strobe Talbot 
SUBJECT: Daily Activity Report 
DECAPTIONED 
Bosnia 
The PC went roughly according to plan and with little 
substantive disagreement, although the situation is complicated 
by the difficult interaction between Madeleine's need to press 
for a hard-trigger resolution in NY and our need to start 
briefing the Hill at the end of the week on how we're going to 
fulfill our obligations under Nunn-Mitchell. Assuming that we 
don't get a hard-trigger resolution by the Nov. 12 deadline, 
we'll put in place a series of selective, carefully calibrated 
measures that bring us into immediate and demonstrable 
compliance with Nunn-Mitchell: we'll have new rules of 
engagement for non-enforcement of the Bosnian embargo, and 
we'll stop sharing with our Allies intelligence that relates 
solely to violations of the Bosnian embargo. The PC pretty 
much split the difference between the Hill's desire for big 
changes and the,desire of some in the Pentagon and CIA to do 
virtually nothing. There was some discussion of pulling out 
Sharp Guard altogether,,but it was decided that would be 
extreme, since it would undercut enforcement of the Serbian 
sanctions as well as the Bosnian ones. 
Toward the end of the week, the Pentagon will take the lead 
first in briefing Sen. Nunn and several other key legislators, 
and later in doing some press backgrounding. 
Madeleine will do her best in the few remaining days, 
including with the possible British compromise preambular 
language that Dick Holbrooke and Robin Renwick discussed over 
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
10/20/2020 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835934 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C O6 8 3 59 3 4 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835934 Date: 11/17/2021 
-BZeRETINODIS 
- 2 - 
the weekend. If this ad-ref "non-proposal" acquires government 
blessing, it would represent something of an achievement -- not 
a "hard trigger," but the "review with a view" that Madeleine 
wants. Whether Renwick's idea will be sellable in London 
remains to be seen. You may need to call Juppe and Hurd, but 
not until later in the week. 
The PC also put in motion plans for joint State/DoD/CIA 
briefings on the consequences of both unilateral and 
multilateral lift. 
Angola 
The issue at today's PC was whether the U.S. should support 
-- and, if so, with what. conditions and degree of participation 
-- a UNAVEM III peacekeeping mission in Angola. The discussion 
had an air of considerable conditionality, to put it mildly, 
since Dos Santos's government troops are fighting ferociously 
and seem about to capture Huambo. Obviously, the issue of a UN 
mission will arise only if, come November 17, Dos Santos signs 
the accords and accepts a full, formal ceasefire. If, contrary 
to present indications, that happens, the PC is prepared to 
commit the U.S. to supporting UNAVEM III; with phased 
deployment, some U.S. logistical support (airlift) and only the 
most token U.S. participation on the ground (a "planning cell" 
of a few people). We're also going to pursue vigorously the 
possibility of Angola absorbing some of the cost of the 
operation. Madeleine is going to see if we can get some of the 
other UNSC members to join us in that and perhaps even make it 
a condition for the operation. 
My Lunch with Brian 
While the atmosphere was entirely friendly and 
constructive, the mood, on Brian's side of the table, was 
somber, even apprehensive, bordering on combative, especially 
when Tim's name came up as it did often. After a couple of 
recent dustups with Tim, Brian is clearly alert to what he sees 
as the danger that State will, next year, make another run at 
AID's statutory standing if not its existence as a separate 
agency. Brian sees a lot of overlap between Tim's sense of his 
own role and the AID Administrator's mandate. They've already 
locked horns on who's got the lead in following up on Cairo. 
Tim has been pushing himself as an interagency "coordinator" on 
population issues. Brian is especially sensitive on that 
subject, since he's already lost a fight to block the creation 
of an NIS assistance coordinator (although, as you know, we've 
yet to fill the post). 
-.SeREVINODIS • 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835934 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
C O6 8 3 59 3 4 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835934 Date: 11/17/2021 
-EBERETINODIS 
- 3 - 
I used the lunch primarily to listen. Brian walked me 
throughLthe whole history of AID's recent existential 
difficulties, going back to the transition, Cliff Wharton's 
study, the evolution of the PPDA, etc. Without in any way 
prejudicing future discussion -- and that emphatically means a 
discussion involving you and ultimately a decision by you --
Brian and I identified the basic issue: on the one hand, in 
the new era and the current budgetary environment, there is an 
imperative to streamline, downsize, amalgamate, better 
coordinate and synchronize wherever possible; at the same time, 
there is also the need for an institutional defender of 
sustainable development (as opposed to policy-driven, 
high-impact, quick-delivery assistance efforts). , That's as 
far as Brian and I took it. In my own head, I'd go this much 
further: it's a very real --and open -- question whether the 
latter need translates into the need for a s,eparate agency, and 
if so, how separate. 
Message to Moscow on Tarig Azziz 
Per your instructions, we are sending a message to 
AMbassador Pickering tonight to make the following points to 
Kozyrev before he sees Tariq Aziz: (1) thanking them for 
advising us in advance on the Aziz visit and noting the 
importance of prior U.S.-Russian consultations on critical 
regional issues such as Iraq; (2) reiterating that Iraq must 
nullify its previous annexation of Kuwait by specifically 
negating each of a series of acts by which it incorporated 
Kuwait into Iraq in 1990, and noting that anything less would 
not conform with your New York agreement with Kozyrev; (3) 
underscoring that recognition is only one of a number of 
requirements established by the UNSC; and (4) asserting that we 
would continue to oppose UNSC action which could lead Iraq to 
conclude that sanctions could be modified before Iraq has met 
fully its obligations. We also asked for a prompt, 
confidential read-out on the visit. 
My Latin America Trip 
After further consideration, taking account 'of the points 
you made Sunday evening when we talked on the phone, I've 
decided to postpone my trip to Latin America until the first 
quarter of next year sometime. As you rightly intimated, there 
is just too much going on in mid-December and this trip comes 
too closely on the heels of the Summit of the Americas to be 
optimal. 
—44',GRAWNODIS 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835934 Date: 11/17/2021