[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 59 6 9FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021 
To the Secretary 
From Strobe Talbott 
RELEASE IN FULL 
EYES ONLY 
March 13, 1994 
I know that you have plenty of material to help you prepare 
for your meeting with Kozyrev. But you asked that I pass along a 
few of my own thoughts, and here they are. 
Part of the lesson of this past week is what a jerk Kozyrev 
can be. But another part is how much trouble he can cause if we 
don't keep him on board our policies. Now that we've beaten back 
his latest mischief, we need to come up with a strategy for more 
assiduously and effectively coopting him and, through him, his 
government in the future, particularly on the Middle East and the 
former Yugoslavia. 
It's a good thing that you've got Jim Collins and Tom 
Pickering there with you. I'm sure they'll have some quite 
specific ideas on a cooption strategy. 
The Kozyrev Caper in the Middle East 
When Tom Donilon and I discussed the suspense and annoyance 
Kozyrev has put'us through over the Hebron resolution, he asked 
whether I thought A) Kozyrev was in some sense "home alone" in 
this ridiculous episode, or B) whether this really was a 
watershed event in US-Russian relations, ushering in a new period 
in which we're going to be increasingly at odds with Moscow in a 
diplomatic zero-sum game. The answer, I think, is more A than B, 
but with a danger of B that we must manage and if possible avoid. 
And, paradoxically but unavoidably, we're going to have to work 
with Kozyrev himself to avoid it. 
Madeleine reports that Vorontsov, who is in general a 
disciplined professional, was perplexed and scathing about 
Kozyrev in this instance; he remarked several times that he was 
"playing his own game." 
If you'll permit me a gratuitous burst of praise for 
colleagues: Madeleine, Ned Walker and the UN team performed a 
diplomatic masterwork Saturday to head off the vote. It was a 
deliciously ironic slam-dunk of Kozyrev that we got the outcome 
we wanted because, in the end, we had the cooperation of al-
Kudwa, who kept the non-aligned with us, and, to some extent, of 
Vorontsov himself, who interpreted his instructions in the least 
troublesome way possible. 
At the same time, it is cold comfort that this problem was 
apparently all Kozyrev's doing. A11 indications are that Yeltsin 
is staying out of the fray on day-to-day, even week-to-week 
1 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 6 9FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021 
matters, leaving them to Chernomyrdin in the political/economic 
field and to Kozyrev in the foreign-policy field. So a Kozyrev-
centric problem is still a very real problem indeed. 
I suspect that several things went into Kozyrev's decision 
to muscle in on the Middle East in the way he did: he was trying 
to get back at us for what he sees as a series of slights over 
the Middle East and the Balkans; he was reminding us that Russia 
still has clout with the Arabs and the Third World (it turned 
out, fortunately, it doesn't have as much as he thought); he was, 
as he's done before, trying to grab the limelight and the credit 
for an impending breakthrough (and ended up looking like a shlump 
of the first order). 
Before leaving this dreadful affair behind and looking 
ahead, one more comment on the way we handled it. In addition to 
getting the outcome we wanted, I think we also managed to lay 
down a marker, which has to do with limits: There are limits to 
what we consider acceptable Russian diplomatic behavior; there 
are limits to our willingness to humor the Russians and go out of 
our way to make them, feel included. We made quite clear to them, 
I think, that we were going to push back at them on this one, 
even if it meant embarrassing them or, more to the point, 
leaving them exposed as having embarrassed themselves, which is 
what happened here. (The UN outcome did not make the Sunday 
morning papers, but it is playing quite prominently on the Sunday 
morning radio shows -- and in just the way we'd want.) 
Tom Pickering and Jim Collins will do what they can to make 
sure that the Russian post-mortem of this affair has the right 
spin from us. We'll let them know, quietly but unmistakably, how 
close they came to putting very dangerous strain on the 
relationship as a whole. I suspect that Yeltsin will be mighty 
upset when he knows how much damage Kozyrev did -- and how much 
more he might have been done. And I think we can find some ways 
of making sure that Yeltsin does indeed know that. 
The Kozyrev Syndrome 
I have read Toby's memo to you and I endorse her analysis of 
the situation in Russia and Kozyrev's role in it. Since we're 
being paid by the taxpayers to engage in diplomacy, not 
psychoanalysis, I will not spend too much of your time here 
probing Kozyrev's motives for his whirling-dervish act this past 
week. But I do think it's important to see his personal behavior 
in the context of what is happening in Russia. 
One way to look at him these days is as a personification of 
the national mood of the country he represents. For several 
years, he was the embodiment of the best, bravest, most pro-
2 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
CO6835969 :IED U.S. DepartmentofState Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021 
Western instincts of his generation of young Soviet diplomats. 
He left the Soviet foreign ministry to join Yeltsin's team in the 
Russian Federation before the breakup of the USSR. He 
articulated the liberal, integrationist (i.e., civilized, non-
expansionist) iriew of Russia's role in the world. He was the 
darling of the West, correspondingly detested by oldliners and 
hardliners. 
Now he acts in a way that often seems to us petulant, 
mischievous, competitive and deliberately unhelpful, sometimes 
even threatening and aggressive. There's a Rodney-Dangerfield 
quality to his demands for respect, an in-your-face quality to 
his assertions of Russia's rights and aspirations. This shift in 
attitude and behavior tracks what many fear is Russia's lurching 
detour from the path of reform. 
No doubt part of what's going on here is that he's gone from 
being a bureaucrat to a minister to a politican. Toby captures 
this very well. He's now very much the Duma deputy from 
Murmansk, which means he has an extremely conservative, largely 
military constituency. Yet despite what we tend to regard as a 
Dr.-Jekyll-to-Mr.-Hyde transformation, the Reds and the Browns 
still see him as a dangerous softy, a give-away artist, who has 
sold Russia out to the West. Zhirinovsky's repeated threats to 
hang Kozyrev in Smolensk Square in front of the ministry are no 
joke, especially to Kozyrev. So a lot of what we're seeing and 
hearing -- and gnashing our teeth over -- is protective 
coloration, the twitching of his survival instinct. 
But I think the Kozyrev problem -- or let's call it the 
Kozyrev challenge -- goes beyond his own personal psychodrama and 
career course-corrections. It's representative of the Russia 
problem/challenge: how to deal with a vast, very strong yet very 
weak country which is suffering from a massive identity crisis 
and insecurity complex? 
In 1991, which was only just over two years ago, Russia 
lost, virtually overnight, an ideology that had largely defined 
its statehood for most of this century; it lost an empire that 
had sustained it for centuries before that; it lost the 
political-economic system that had provided, however inadequately 
and cruelly, for the basic wellfare of the populace; it lost the 
Warsaw Pact, which had been its bastion of security throughout 
the Cold War. 
No major country that I can think of -- other than ones that 
suffered total defeat in war -- has undergone anything like this 
sort body-blow to its sense of itself and of its place in the 
world. 
What we're seeing now, in the foreign-policy realm, is the 
beginning of Russia's recovery, its attempt to redefine national 
3 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 4]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 6 9FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021 
interest and nationhood itself in a way that generates national 
self-respect and self-confidence. That's obviously a neutral, 
even benign-sounding, formulation of what's going on, but I offer 
it with full awareness that it could, in the way it plays out, be 
anything but benign. 
Reconciling Russian Interests with Ours 
We need, I think, to recognize clearly what the most basic, 
driving factors are in this process. Then we need to seek, in 
the way we respond to those factors, to influence the process so 
that it unfolds in the right direction -- i.e., toward 
integration rather than isolation/aggreission. Those factors are 
essentially five (and this is really just a slight repackaging of 
the main points in Toby's memo): 
1) Russia will, to an increasing extent, want to be seen as 
making its foreign policy for its own sake and no one 
else's. It will resist any implication that having lost the 
Cold War, it will now play by rules made by the victors and 
imposed upon it as the defeated party. 
2)Despite all that it has lost in the last few years, 
Russia believes it has retained what it sees as its destiny 
and prerogatives as a great power, with a major role to play 
in the world. Andrei Gromyko used to boast that there was 
no international problem that could be solved without the 
USSR's permission and participation. Kozyrev wouldn't go 
that far. He'll let us "do" Somalia and Cambodia (thanks a 
lot, Andrei!). But on certain key issues with which the 
Soviet Union was closely associated -- most prominently and 
pertinently the Middle East -- he would claim that the new 
Russia inherited, as part of its legacy from the old USSR, 
pride of place at the negotiating table and at the signing 
ceremonies: 
3) Russia'is adamant about having vital security interests 
in the former Soviet republics, especially in the soft-
underbelly regions of the Transcaucasus and Central Asia. 
4) Russia is going to continue to champion the "human 
rights" of the Russian diaspora. 
5) Its going to pursue its economic and commercial 
interests, notably including in arms sales, in pursuit of 
its own need for hard-currency earnings rather in accord 
with our nonproliferation exhortations -- at least when it 
comes to crunch between the two. 
4 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 5]
C O 6 8 3 5 9 6 9FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021 
Taken together, or in any combination, all five of these 
factors have the potential to cause major problems. But they are 
also all manageable -- if we can get the Russians to define and 
pursue them in a way that is compatible with our own national-
security and foreign-policy objectives and interests. To wit: 
1) Russian foreign policy for Russia's sake: appealing-to 
other countries' sense of their own self-interest is 
something that we have to do all the time, so there's 
nothing unusual about having to do it with Russia. By the 
same token, we've got to gird ourselves for those cases 
where we won't succeed. There will be times with Russia, as 
there are with other countries with whom we've had decent 
relations for much longer, that our interests and therefore 
our policies are simply unreconcilable; we must adopt an 
agree-to-disagree posture. We've got to get our own public 
to accept that as part of the normal state of affairs. 
The operating principle here is pretty simple: whatever 
the subject -- whether it's Bosnia, the Arab-Israelilaeace 
process, Georgian peacekeeping, Baltic troop withdrawals, 
Ukrainian nuclear weapons, NATO expansion -- we have our 
national interest and Russia has its own. To the extent 
possible, we want to find common ground on these issues. 
When we can, we'll work together; when we can't, we need to 
find ways of minimizing the damage done both on the issue at 
hand and to the relationship as a whole. 
During the Cold War, the U.S. and the Soviet Union were 
locked in a global win/lose rivalry. Except on the core 
question of mutual survival -- i.e., avoiding nuclear war 
there was very little on which we could genuinely work 
together. That's changed. Now there's a lot on which we 
can cooperate. Bosnia and the Middle East are cases in 
point._ On Bosnia, we've got a shared interest in a 
settlement, and we've worked pretty well in advancing that 
goal. On the Middle East, too, we've got a shared interest 
in putting Hebron behind us and getting the parties back to 
the talks. 
As long as Russian activities and statements move 
events in the direction we want, we will welcome them. We 
certainly welcomed the fact that when the chips were down, 
Russia (through Kozyrev personally) supported the need for a 
plausible threat of force in Bosnia -- and then supported 
the use of force in the case of the Serb planes that were 
downed. But this past week, Kozyrev's actions jeopardized 
progress toward a goal that we and he both want to achieve. 
Hence our strong, stern remonstrations. 
5 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 6]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 6 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021 
2) Russia as a great power: Here we've probably got to be a 
bit more imaginative and proactive (and also willing to bite 
our tongue and count to 10 more often). We can probably 
figure out some mechanisms and procedures for increasing 
consultations (the President, at the Oval Office meeting on 
Friday, said he wanted to do this with regard to both Bosnia 
and the Middle East). 
At the same time, while we can resolve to consult 
sooner-and more often and at a higher level, I don't think 
we've got too much to apologize for. You can remind Andrei 
that when Tom Pickering back in the US during the climactic 
week after the Sarajevo massacre, we sent Jim Collins over 
to camp out in Andrei's outer office and be available for 
real-time consultations. President Clinton has, I'm sure, 
corresponded with, and telephoned, President Yeltsin more 
than he has with any other leader. We're leading within the 
G-7 to increase Russian participation at Naples (just as we 
led last year with regard to Tokyo); we're doing the same 
thing on PFP (Peter and I have spent a lot of time on that 
subject this past week, both internally and with visiting 
Brits and Germans); we've adopted a quad-plus-one formula on 
Bosnia. 
(Incidentally, if Andrei gives you too much of a hard 
time on this, you can counter-guilt-trip him by pointing out 
that we have one of our outstanding diplomats in Moscow as 
Ambassador, while there hasn't been a Russian Ambassador in 
Washington for months. As you probably know, this is in 
part because the former Ambassador, Lukin, whom Andrei,
despises, in his new capacity as chairman of the foreign 
affairs committee of the Duma is insisting on the right to 
confirm Vorontsov for the Washington job.) 
3) Russia's vital interests in the "near abroad": it has ' 
such,interests; we recognize that. In fact, we're prepared 
to help in a variety of ways. Example: support for a UN 
peacekeeping force in Georgia; working with Russia in CSCE 
on Nagorno-Karabakh; the Trilateral Accord with Ukraine. 
4) The Russian diaspora: onythis tricky, incendiary issue, 
you've got the best credentials imaginable. When you met 
with Kozyrev for the first time in your capacity as 
Secretary -- in Geneva a year ago,last month -- you told him 
that we considered the human, or political, rights of 
Russians outside of Russia to be a valid item on the agenda 
for our dialogue with the Baltics and other non-Russian 
former Soviet states. We've made good on that. You and the 
President have pressed the case for "inclusive democracy" 
with the Baltic leaderships. 
6 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 7]
c O 6 8 3 5 9 6 9 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021 
Of course, however, we must continue to couple this 
theme with the strong, frequent reminders that we do not 
consider the issue of ethnic Russians in the "near abroad" 
to be a legitimate pretext for Russian military 
intervention, political intimidation, or economic coercion 
of those states -- any more than we'd consider it legitimate 
for Iran, say, to claim "protective rights" over Muslims in 
the North Caucasus region of Russia. 
The more Russia follows an integrationist course --
harmonizing its behavior and policies with international 
norms and institutions -- the more it will be able to 
advance the legitimate interests of ethnic Russians in 
neighboring states. On the other hand, the more it pursues 
a unilateralist course -- bullying neighbors over the ethnic 
Russian issue -- the more it will scare those governments 
into regarding, and treating, their Russian populations as 
fifth columns of Moscow. 
5) Commercial interests versus nonproliferation: This is a 
tough one for us, and particularly for Lynn Davis., We're up 
against it now on building a COCOM successor regime and 
trying to hold the line on Iraq sanctions. It's a problem 
we face not only with Russia but with France, Germany and 
some other "partners" of longer standing. 
We were able, in the test case of MTCR, to come out 
well, but that's because we coupled insistence on Russia's 
cancellation of the India rocket sale with increased Russian 
access to the international commercial space-launch market. 
That's the essence of what we've got to keep doing: pursue a 
two-track policy of pressing our nonproliferation goals on 
Russia while working hard and successfully to get Russia 
more market access, in part as compensation for the cost of 
a responsible export policy. 
These are all points that I think will find resonance with 
Kozyrev. I was struck by the last paragraph of Toby's memo, in 
which she recalled making to Kozyrev the indisputable argument 
that ours is the.best possible American Administration from the 
standpoint of Russian reformers. 
My parting thought is this: The converse of Toby's line is 
also true. Kozyrev is not just the only Russian foreign minister 
we've got to deal with -- he may be the best one we're likely to 
get, given everything that's going on in his country. 
On that appalling note -- which, after the experience of the 
past few days, I have the courage to express only because I'm 
safely 13,000 miles away from your immediate reaction -- I wish 
you a full, frank, businesslike and useful exchange of views in 
Vladivostok, and a safe trip home. 
7 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835969 Date: 11/17/2021