[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 2 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835929 Date: 11/17/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL] 
DECLASSIFIED 
United States Department of State 
The Deputy Secretary of State 
Washington, D.C. 20520 
December 2, 1994 
NODIS DECAPTIONED 
DECL: OADR 
NOTE TO THE SECRETARY 
Chris: 
I am sending this report on the Bosnia PC eyes-only to you 
via the Liz channel. You'll immediately understand both the 
sensitivity, requiring zero distribution, and the importance, 
requiring that I find a way of sharing it with you. 
The PC, which lasted nearly two hours, was 
principals-only, - in part to underscore Tony's -- indeed, 
everyone's -- concern over leaks. Tony began with a blunt 
exhortation that participants in these meetings be much more 
discreet and disciplined about debriefing back in their 
buildings, lest we have repetitions of the public-affairs 
disaster that occurred last Tuesday, with headlines like "U.S. 
May OK `Greater Serbia' ." 
We then got into a discussion of the next steps in Bosnia, 
particularly those that we might need to contemplate if 
diplomacy fails and if UNPROFOR pulls out. I reminded the group 
that diplomacy has not yet failed and may not in the end fail 
and that you were in Brussels conducting diplomacy with your 
Contact Group counterparts even as we sat there in the Sitroom; 
therefore nothing should be considered decided until we'd had a 
full report and recommendations from you; there should be.no 
press backgrounding whatsoever out of the meeting. Tony agreed 
with all this and added that he would not even do a report off 
the meeting to the President until he'd heard from you and had a 
chance to review the various issues discussed in the light of 
your work in Brussels. 
&BGRET,ÉNODIS
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
10/20/2020 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835929 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
c O6 8 3 5 9 2 9 1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835929 Date: 11/17/2021 
--Sr-BETINODIS
- 2 - 
Tony posed the question of whether the U.S. should provide 
military support for the evacuation of UNPROFOR -- and whether 
we should in some sense link or condition our willingness to 
provide that support to the Allies' support for lift-and-strike 
after the departure of UNPROFOR. On the first question, there 
was not much controversy: the answer was yes, of course, we 
should be ready to help get UNPROFOR safely out. .On the second 
question, there was a great deal of debate, and it came out a 
fairly resounding no. Several of us -- Bill Perry, Shali, 
Madeleine, Leon Fuerth and myself -- spoke up in pretty strong 
terms against linkage or conditionality, since it would be an 
affront to our Allies and would guarantee exactly the sort of 
terminal intra-alliance breach we've all feared. Tony seemed to 
accept the point. Sandy Berger argued that perhaps we could 
discuss with the Allies our willingness to help with evacuation 
"in parallel with" or "in the context of" what would come 
afterward -- in other words: seeking support for lift from the 
Allies while avoiding explicit linkage that would be offensive 
to them. That elicited another round of warnings against any 
approach that could be construed as even tacit conditionality. 
From there we went to the subject of whether 
lift-and-strike would in fact advance our objective, which is 
the survival of the Bosnian state in the face of Serb 
aggression. Shali put forward the argument that in_fact 
lift-and-strike would "condemn the Muslims to death... I can't 
think of any way to get in arms to the Muslims quickly enough to 
keep them from being wiped out." Virtually any lift scenario, 
he said, "is not a good option." Madeleine concurred. Leon 
Fuerth provided the single most pessimistic statement in the 
meeting (which is saying a lot) when he ventured that once 
UNPROFOR is out and the arms embargo is lifted, the conflict in 
the Balkans could be like the Thirty Years War -- if not the 
Hundred Years War. 
Tony pushed back a bit, making the case that lift might 
help, but in the end he summarized an emerging consensus that it 
was in our interest to keep UNPROFOR in place and avoid lift (or 
at least defer it as long as possible). At the same time, no 
one argued for changing our public posture on lift, among other 
things because a change would be provocative and damaging with 
the Congress. It was left that lift would remain "on the table" 
in the formulation we've been using for, lo, these many months. 
Bill Perry then laid out his view on next steps: 
-- If UNPROFOR stays, we should keep working the 
diplomatic track. But we should also be prepared for 
"another Bihac" --and perhaps "preempt" by declaring 
exclusion zones around Srebrenica and Zepa. We should 
also step up efforts to preserve NATO unity by opposing 
unilateral lift ("take on Dole") and by reiterating that 
we'll not press multilateral lift at this time. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835929 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
C O6 8 3 59 2 9:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835929 Date: 11/17/2021 
-5-BGRE.W0DIS
- 3 - 
-- If UNPROFOR leaves, we should say we'll help in the 
evacuation. We should also "demand" a ceasefire, a 
build-down, and re-negotiation (he admitted these terms 
needed a lot of work to be meaningful). If the Bosnian 
Serbs violate these demands, the "or-else" would be a NATO 
threat of lift-and-strike. If Serbia itself violates 
them, NATO should threaten additional sanctions plus 
strategic air strikes against targets in Serbia. 
This was at theend of the meeting, and it was established 
once again that no decisions had been taken and no memo would, be 
• going to the President, pending your input from Brussels. 
Nonetheless, I felt compelled to register my own concern about 
the idea of strategic strikes against Serbia, given the 
likelihood that that would be extremely divisive within NATO and 
the certainty that it would rupture relations with Russia. 
Bill Perry is going to be doing one of the Sunday shows. 
You might want to reach him by phone between now and then to 
compare talking points. FYI, he'll be at the Army-Navy Game 
tomorrow (Saturday), rooting for Army the first half, Navy the 
second.le 
(-4 c„,-+4 -e.. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835929 Date: 11/17/2021