[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 5 47IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835954 Date: 11/17/2021 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Saturday, April 2, 1994 
Chris: 
I can't resist starting with an anecdote. Yesterday, at the 
end of my 8:30 meeting with the Assistant Secretaries, I reported 
on my good lunch with Sandy Berger, John Deutch and Leon Fuerth. 
I ran through several items, then mentioned that Sandy had 
proposed a plan for improving coordination and communication 
between the NSC and State; he would designate an NSC senior 
director who knows State well to serve as a regular liaison; this 
person would attend our daily Assistant Secretaries meetings and 
generally be helpful and collegial; the designee was Dick Clarke. 
I was prepared to spin this out for several more sentences,, but I 
felt in genuine fear of being linched, so I adjourned the meeting 
abruptly with the observation that all my colleagues were April 
fools. 
Now, on to your response to my memo. I propose that I work 
over the weekend and on Monday with Marc, bringing him fully into 
this exercise as -- what he is! -- its executive secretary. 
We'll set up a plan for implementing Fig. E; we'll work up some 
language announcing it to the building and to the NSC, as well as 
some talking points for you to use with Peter and others. 
For semi-public or even inhouse purposes -- that is, 
anything that's leakable -- we've got to think through how much 
of our plan we want to put on paper. For example, there are a 
lot of countries, not to mention whole areas of the world, that 
aren't on Fig. E in,its present form. Per your instructions, 
we'll add Western Europe at the top, probably as No. 2. But that 
leaves my two adopted orphans, South Asia and Latin America off, 
as well as Southeast Asia, Ukraine, etc. We don't want to get 
their noses out of joint, or their constituencies. We'll figure 
out a way of dealing with this. 
Marc will then go over all of this with you when you return, 
and we'll be ready to move as quickly as you want. 
Obviously, it's not ideal that I'm leaving for the far ends 
of the earth on Monday night. But we can turn that to our 
advantage, I think. I kind of like the idea of your going off 
for a long Easter weekend, recharging your batteries a bit, 
thinking over the first year of the Administration, and coming 
back with some thoughts. We need make no secret of the fact that 
I've had some input. After all, having a new D is part of the 
reason for restructuring things a bit.
If this sounds good to you, I'll go to work on it and have a 
check-out conversation with you on where we stand on Monday 
before I leave. 
1 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017L13804 Doc No. C06835954 Date: 11/17/2021