[Page 1]
CO 6834 7 131FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06834713 Date: 11/17/2021 
ea. 
RELEASE IN FULL 
STATUS OF GULF BURDEN SHARING 
State chaired an interagency meeting, November 9, to review 
the status of close-out plans for Operation Vigilant Warrior, 
planning for post-Vigilant Warrior presence, and a strategy for 
burdensharing. ASD Nye, JCS, CENTCOM, NSC, and CIA attended 
the meeting, along with State. 
DOD estimated costs for Vigilant Warrior at $650 million. 
DOD and CENTCOM need to refine the numbers, in part to cover 
$141 million in depreciation. We expect to be able to brief 
the GCC states on costs by November 18.
The group agreed with our strategy of approaching Kuwait 
and Saudi Arabia first with the cost data and coordinating with 
them on next steps. We believe they have been following up on 
Secretary Christopher's October 12 discussions in Kuwait and 
may either have arranged a GCC burdensharing fund to pay for 
Vigilant Warrior or identified problems we can address 
together. ASD Nye stressed that DOD is seeking early agreement 
-- before Christmas - on Vigilant Warrior cost-sharing. 
The group will meet again in late November or early 
December to discuss Phase II which includes post-Vigilant 
Warrior operations and associated burdensharing. CENTCOM has 
worked on a plan, based on the President's decisions of 
November 5, but more remains to be done before the plan can be 
presented to our partners in the region. State will also be 
prepared at that time to discuss a burdensharing proposal that 
might include participation by parties outside of the region. 
A decision on travel to the region by a State/DOD team on 
burdensharing was held in abeyance pending the results of our 
preliminary consultations with the Kuwaitis and Saudis. The 
group agreed that we would prefer to have the team focus on the 
broader post-Vigilant Warrior strategy. This is contingent, 
however on our ability to complete burdensharing arrangements 
for Vigilant Warrior through our embassies in the region or 
with GCC Ambassadors here. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06834713 Date: 11/17/2021