[Page 1]
c O6 8 3 5 9 5 0 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835950 Date: 11/17/2021 
• 
June 22, 1994 
Chris: 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Before you left we had a conversation about filling the 
post of Ambassador'to Beijing. I asked if you would consider 
Mort Abramowitz for the job. You wondered whether Mort had not 
disqualified himself by his recent public writings, especially 
his column criticizing our Bosnia policy. You asked me to 
re-read Mort's pieces and decide whether I still could, in good 
conscience, recommend him. I have done so -- and do indeed 
still think this is the way we should proceed. 
I have also checked with the other members of the cabal 
--Peter Tarnoff, Win Lord and Marc Grossman -- and asked them 
for their views. They, too, still think Mort's the man for the 
job. 
Before I go any further, I should address another concern 
that quite rightly is, I'm sure, on your mind: Mort's record of 
playing Hamlet when sounded out for Administration posts, most 
egregiously in the case of Israel. We (the cabal) have 
determined, beyond any doubt whatsoever -- to the point that we 
are all willing to stake our reputations in your eyes -- on the 
assertion that if offered this post, Mort will accept. (We've 
also taken pains to make sure that he understands that he has 
not been offered the job -- and may never be.) So that issue, 
at least, is simple: if we want him, we'll get him. Period. 
Next, on his writings: my Nexus search has turned up 10 
pieces (attached). The troublesome ones are the three on 
Bosnia. They're tough -- no question about that; one is 
co-authored with Jeane Kirkpatrick. It's especially rough. 
However, I don't think that they disqualify him. They are 
forceful pieces of criticism and advocacy on an issue that is 
obviously extremely controversial and that has generated a lot 
of heat, but they do not engage in ad hominem attacks on the 
President (or the Secretary of State); nor do they stake out a 
position that is certifiably irresponsible. Moreover, they 
concern a subject that has nothing to do with the post for which 
he might be nominated. 
Would they pose any sort of threat to his confirmation? 
No, I don't think so. Would they provide a target of 
opportunity, during his confirmation hearings, for partisan 
attacks on our Bosnia policy? Yes, they probably would. But I 
don't think that would cause either him or us too much trouble. 
The other pieces don't pose any special problems that I 
can see. The Thais are obviously upset about his article 
accusing them of complicity in the ongoing outrates of the Khmer 
Rouge, but I don't think any Senator would take Mort to task for 
that. 
Peter, Marc, Winston and I are pushing Mort -- and testing 
your patience in doing so -- because we all think that he is in 
a class by himself. He's an old China hand. He came into the 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835950 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 59 5 0 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835950 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 2 - 
Foreign Service as a Chinese language officer; he's been working 
on that part of the world -- and that country -- off and on for 
well over 30 years. He has immense standing not only among 
diplomats and government officials but academics and think-tank 
types. He is a heavyweight. It's an appointment that would be 
widely hailed, including by the Chinese. Mort's breadth of 
experience would enable him to deal superbly with ap aspects of 
the S4no-American relationship during the coming period of 
"engagement." 
Moreover, Mort is well regarded in circles where we need 
to bolster support -- neocons, the foreign-policy 
establishment. Bringing him into the Administration would earn,
us credit for strengthening, and broadening, the team. 
Now, I'm not sure that any of this fully answers the 
question you asked about why Mort commands the extraordinary 
loyalty and promotional enthusiasm that he does among those who 
know him. The answer, Chris, is quite simply that this guy has 
a rare combination of independence, reliability, 
straightforwardness and intelligence. In a way which his 
friends and promoters find almost perverse, his good qualities 
were apparent in the way he conducted himself these last few 
months. China is the one ambassadorship he's always wanted; he 
would have stayed in the government during the previous 
Administration if he'd thought he stood a chance of getting it; 
it's the one post he'd leave Carnegie for. He could have 
increased his chances of getting it if he'd either kept silent 
or written op-eds defending the Administration. But he took 
some swipes at us because he felt we deserved them -- and 
because he felt very, very strongly on the subject. That, in a 
nutshell, is what draws many of us to Mort: he is a highly 
experienced, totally disciplined professional, yet a man of real 
intellectual passion and total integrity. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835950 Date: 11/17/2021