[Page 1]
C O 6 8 3 5 8 21 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835821 Date: 11/17/2021 
25 January 1994 
Dear Strobe: 
02r 
RELEASE IN FULL 
First, congratulations on your appointment. You bring great 
strengths to the position, strengths the Administration and the 
President very much need in the design and implementation of our 
foreign policy. 
Let me offer three little bits of unsolicited advice as seen from 
my corner of the world here at the NSC. Please be discrete with 
this little note since it is somewhat 'out of channels'. 
1. You need a strateqy for dealinq with the budqet. Unfortunately, 
you are walking into a situation that has gotten messy. 
As you know, the DepSec has typically done the Department's budget 
and assembled the budget requests of other international agencies 
like AID, OPIC, etc. This is one of the critical foreign affairs 
issues for this Administration -- in tough budgetary times, who 
gets what. Who gets what within the 150 account, and how shall we 
make allocations across the 150 and 050 accounts? In broad terms 
this year we did restructure'the budget and the Foreign Affairs Act 
to express the President's new priorities. But except for the 
program you ran (Russian aid), most other program were ravaged 
(Latin America is down by >50%, Asia down by >30%. The bottom line 
that is you need a two-year strategy to reorient expenditures 
within 150 and to address the cross-account resource issues (i.e. 
can you get more 150 money from Defense and Intelligence). 
As far as I can tell, many outside of State (and many within) 
believe that the preparation of the 150 international account this 
year has never been more problematic and messy. The 
Congressionally-mandated rescissions have played havoc with the 
FY94 budget and planning for FY95: Treasury screams for more 
multilateral development bank money. The trade agencies insist on 
more. State's budget submission was late and far out of line with 
OMB/White House guidelines and generally was a mess. 
On the other hand, the budget reform effort out of the policy and 
budget shop was very good indeed. It developed new budget/policy 
categories to reflect the President's priorities, and did a good 
job of linking the priorities in a convincing way. 
Therefore, I would sit back and think about a 2-3 year strategy for 
how you want to shape and reshape the FY95, FY96 and FY97 budgets. 
Wendy Sherman and Gordon Adams' new effort to bring some coherence 
to the budget legislation process this year is a step in the right 
direction. And in Craig Johnson you have a very able officer who 
seems to be on top of the issues already. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835821 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 5 8 21 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835821 Date: 11/17/2021 
2. Relations between State Defense Seem-Especially Fractious. 
Speaking of the 050 account....From where we sit in global affairs 
at NSC, we witness a lot of State-Defense shoving matches, as we 
saw with the late departed Global Cooperative Initiatives, as 
flared up with the FAA/Security Assistance Rewrite, and as is being 
fought daily with all the peacekeeping initiatives. This will 
remain one of the most salient fault line in the Administration. 
There are important steps that need to be taken to create 
"confidence building measures' between the staffs in the two big 
buildings (at DoD, for both J-5 and OSD). 
3. We have a crisis in Constituency Building and Public Enqaqement. 
You are being appointed in part I assume because we have not 
done a good job of communicating oursforeign policies to the public 
and press, nor of coopting outsiders and potential critics, nor of 
sending insiders to go talk to outsiders nor of mobilizing a new 
constituency for engagement. Russia is perhaps the only exception 
(the St. Louis conference, etc.). 
I have been moaning and groaning about this, and we have started to 
work on foreign policy outreach issues more seriously here at the 
White House. On the domestic side - health care, budget votes, etc. 
we do a superb full court press. And we did it for NAFTA and - 
Russia. Since your boss like my boss is now committed to the idea 
of outreach, this may be an excellent time to push ahead' with a 
thoughtful and forward-looking outreach campaign. When the history 
books are written in 20 years, these big themes will be the ones on 
which we will be judged. You are in a unique and powerful position 
to give this idea -- "the America desk", enlarging our domestic 
constituencies as we enlarge democracy around the world -- a huge 
push. The idea needs a coordinated, long range strategy as pro-
active as our Russia policy. 
I have a few other burning issues (e.g. who in the Department will 
track the Foreign Assistance Act rewrite, and our hit-or-miss 
attention to Africa), but I will spare you those. I am confident 
you recognize'these challenges, and that others have brought them 
to your attention. But as Adlai Stevenson once wrote describing 
politics and foreign policy -- the reiteration of the Obvious is 
far more important than the elucidation of the obscure. 
If you would like to discuss these issues in person, just let me 
know. r can stop by your office at your convenience. 
Fran and I send you and Brooke best wishes for the New Year. 
Er est J. Wilson III 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835821 Date: 11/17/2021