[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 8 2>IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835982 Date: 11/17/2021 
January 29, 1994 
Dear Yuri: 
Like the last such letter I sent you via Jim, this one is 
entirely personal. It is, as we say, for your Peyes only" (okay: 
truth to tell, Jim's eyes will have pessed over it too). As much 
as anything, it's a chance for me to feel just a bit more 
connected, viCariously, to your session there with Jim. It 
pleases me to think of the two of you solving all our problems 
over sushi and sake. 
RELEASE IN FULL 
And we've got a lot of problems to solve. As you know, 
we've had a very rough patch on the home front over our Russia 
policy. I don't need to go into any great detail, since you've 
no doubt seen plenty of it in your embassy's reporting and in the 
press. I testified before two committees of Congress last week: 
Sen. Leahy's subcommittee on foreign assistance, and Congressman 
Hamilton's committee on foreign affairs (I'm attaching a copy of 
the testimony I used). In both cases,,I got hit with a ppwerful 
blast of bipartisan anxiety over whether Russia has, in some 
profound and permanent sense, abandoned reform -- and, by 
implication, whether we should therefpre abandon our support for 
reform. 
We're also getting strong early-warning signals that some 
Republicans see this as a campaign issue for 1996. So we could 
be in for a who-lost-Russia? debate -- that, plus accusations 
that our Administration is naive and that it is "appeasing" a 
Russia whose real face is Zhirinovsky's. Enough of this talk of 
"engagement" and "integration" for Russia, a lot of voices are 
saying; it's time to go back to containment. That's implied in 
much of what we're hearing; it's close to explicit in some of 
Henry Kissinger's recent writings. 
Secretary Christopher has been picking up the same thing in 
a number of encounters of his own with key legislators, and he 
will be having quite a few more as he goes up to the Hill to 
defend our budget. 
Meanwhile, I know from what I read from our embassy -- and 
from the message I'm getting loud and clear from Amb. Lukin as he 
prepares to bid us farewell -- that there is, on your side, 
particularly in the Parliament, a good deal of skepticism about 
US intentions and about the value of the relationship. 
When I wrote you on December 27, I conjured up the danger of 
"a return to confrontation in US-Russian relations; a return to 
the division of Eurasia into blocs; a return, in short, to some 
version of the Cold War." I'm certain we're not there yet, and 
I'm confident we can avoid ever getting there. Nonetheless, that 
danger is more prominently on people's minds now then at any 
1 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835982 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 8 2>IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835982 Date: 11/17/2021 
point since the collapse of the August 1991 coup. 
My principal purpose in this letter, however, is not to 
dwell on alarm. Rather, it's to underscore what I hope you 
already know: you're dealing with an Administration that is 
determined to do everything in its power to keep what is most 
promising in our relationship on track. The President, I think 
you'll agree, set exactly the right tone during the summit; 
Secretary Christopher has been rock-solid in defending the 
underlying premises of our policy in the face of some 
considerable skepticism from Congress and the press over the past 
couple of weeks. We don't accept the proposition that your 
country has fundamentally changed course, and we're not about to 
give in to the pressure that's building to change course 
ourselves. 
As you know, the proximate cause-of the pessimism here is 
the departure of Gaidar and Fyodorov from the government. You 
and I talked about that issue when we sat in the corner during 
the concert after the state dinner. Since then, we've said 
repeatedly that we make American policy in response to Russian 
policy, not in response to'the presence or absence of individual 
personalities in the Russian government at any one time. 
At immediate issue, in the jitters over Gaidar and 
Fyodorov's departures, is economic policy: credit and subsidy 
levels, inflation rates, what the repudiation of "market 
romanticism" and the endorsement of "non-monetary measures" will 
mean in practice. 
I realize there's not a whole lot you can do about those matters, 
although Jim will be all ears to hear your analysis and 
prognosis, and to get your advice on how we should interpret, and 
respond to, economic developments. 
The point I want to make here is that worries about the 
possible "Sovietization" (or, as some are saying, the 
"Ukrainization") of the Russian economy is fueling concern over a 
perceived similar trend in Russian foreign and security policy. 
Now, in fact your government -- and you personally --
deserve a lot of credit for having compiled a record in '93 that 
goes a long way toward disproving the case that Russia is back on 
the geopolitical offensive, that it is restoring the empire and 
the Union. In my testimony last week, I cited the progress on 
the Baltics; the Ukraine deal; Russia's willingness to sign up 
for Partnership for Peace; Russia's having shifted from being 
part of the problem in Abkhazia to being part of the solution (we 
hope) in Georgia now; our continuing attempt to find a common 
approach over Nagorno-Karabakh. 
What we need to do in '94 is keep moving on all those 
issues, and a couple of additional ones as well (Moldova has a 
2 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835982 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 8 2,IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835982 Date: 11/17/2021 
very troublesome feel about it these days). 
You and Jim will be talking about the particulars. What I 
want you to know is that while we're clearly counting on your 
government to work with us on a range of international issues, 
I'm also well aware that the onus is on us, the American side, in 
several respects. For one thing, we've got to develop a US 
policy with regard to CIS peacekeeping that meets Russian policy 
halfway. That is, if we're going to insist (as we do) that' 
Russia cooperate with international mechanisms and adhere to 
international norms when operating in neighboring states, we've 
got to do everything we can to make sure there are indeed 
mechanisms and arrangements available to you. The immediate 
issue is Georgia, where Jim has done heroic work already within 
our government. He'll explain to you something about the 
political, bureaucratic and budgetary constraints that we're 
wrestling with, but we're determined to get the right outcome. 
For another thing, I know -- and I have this much in mind 
when I give interviews or appear before Congress -- we've got to 
be careful to think and talk about Russian foreign policy in a 
way that does not feed the/impression on your side that there's a 
zero-sum game going on between the US and Russia. For example, 
we must not talk about the Baltics in a way that makes it appear 
that Russia is making a concession to the US or the West. Just 
as we have to based our policy toward you on our own self-
interest, we know that you must do the same in terms of your own 
Parliament and public. I believe that this can be done, on'both 
sides, by emphasizing, and giving concrete meaning to, the 
integration theme that Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin made the 
centerpiece of their meeting. 
That's it for now. As I said at the outset, this letter, as 
much as anything, is a gimmick that allows me to feel that I'm 
tagging along with Jim as he sets off,for his meeting with you. 
We'll get a chance to see each other soon, I hope. It now looks 
like my confirmation hearing is set for February 8, so let's 
shoot for the end of the month for your visit here. 
Brooke sends her regards -- and looks 
forward to seeing you when you come here.
Cheers, 
3 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835982 Date: 11/17/2021