[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 5 92 6 :IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021 
United States Department of State 
The Deputy Secretnry of State 
Washington, D.C. 20.520 
DECAPTIONED 
DECL: OADR 
TO: THE SECRETARY 
FROM: Strobe Talbott 
SUBJECT: The Vice President's Trip to Russia 
December 19, 1994 - 
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED] 
Boris Yeltsin's outburst in Budapest now appears to have 
been a rough spot in the roadbed rather than the derailing we 
feared: That is thanks in considerable measure to some deft 
and timely repair work by the Vice President. He used his ' 
three-day visit to Moscow to clear up the "misunderstanding" of 
two weeks ago. He has helped nip in the bud talk about a "cold 
peace" and put the U.S.-Russian relationship back on track. He 
and Yeltsin.also agreed on a conceptual roadmap that should 
allow us -- which is to say, you and Kozyrev starting next 
month -- to proceed wit.h deliberations on NATO expansion in a 
way that will not touch off a Budapest-like crisis every time 
the U.S. or the Alliance raises the issue. 
That said, I come home less than sanguine. To say, as the 
Vice President did in Moscow, that U.S.-Russian relations are 
"on track" does not mean that the way ahead is clear or that 
it's going to be easy. In retrospect, the Budapest 
misadventure underscores some problems ahead. 
First, the good news: Yeltsin needed mainly to be 
reassured that we were not rushing to add Poland and the other 
visegrad countries to NATO in 1995. That was easy (although 
his suspicion that we might bring in new members next year is 
unsettling in itself, given the implausibility of such a 
timetable and the lengths to which we'd gone to brief every 
relevant official of his government about what the NAC 
communique meant; but more on that below). 
-S2eRET-T--
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
10/14/2020 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C O6 8 3 5 9 26 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021 
=RIM -
- 2 - 
The Vice President promised Yeltsin we would find a way of 
developing the NATO-Russian relationship "in parallel" with the 
process of NATO expansion. As amplified notionally by others 
with whom we spoke (Kozyrev, Mamedov, Ryurikov and former 
Ambassador Lukin, who's now head-of the foreign-affairs 
committee of the Duma), this probably means your hammering out 
with Kozyrev some sort of NATO-Russian charter, agreement or 
even a treaty that would update and customize the sort of 
mutual security assurances that are now enshrined in the CSCE, 
the NPT agreements, and the U.S.-Russian-Ukrainian trilateral 
accord. 
What the Russians cleatly need is to be able to sell to 
their own public, parliament and military the case that they, 
too, are getting something out of the post-Cold War security 
arrangement -- that they are not merely acquiescing in the 
West's new "insurance policy" against future Russian 
misbehavior. As they see it, they need some positive`security 
benefit of their own. F.rom the standpoint of our own interests 
as well, the ideal arrangement would be something that serves 
as a positive incentive for them not to go bad. 
This project will require a lot of effort in '95, but it 
could yield a welcome, durable buttress to the famous 
architecture we've been talking about for the last several 
months. 
Having spent several days listening to the Vice President 
talk about NATO expansion and engaging in quite a bit of that 
talk myself -- with Kozyrev, Mamedov, Ryurikov and Lukin I 
believe we must also have better answers to questions that our 
current policy raises: 
1) Our current position is based on the proposition that an 
expanded NATO will not be directed at Russia. Rather, its 
purpose will be to ensure stability and suppress or deter 
ethnic conflict in Central Europe -- a goal that Russia 
should be able to support. 
The question is, do we really, or at least entirely, 
believe this? Certainly the Poles and Czechs don't. They want 
admission to NATO not because it will suppress the 
Hungarian-Slovak feud but because it will, they hope, protect 
them from a resurgent, aggressive Russia. Moreover, the 
rationale for NATO expansion that plays up Central European 
stability rings hollow against the backdrop of the on-going 
catastrophe in Bosnia, which has so far been an embarrassment 
to NATO. This is to say simply that we've got a lot of work to 
do on defining, in more concrete and plausible terms, the 
mission of a post-Cold War NATO. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
CO6835926 =IED U.S. DepartmentofState Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021 
5 
- 3 - 
2)/We are, as an Administration, open to the charge of 
trying to have it both ways on the timing of NATO 
expansion. Your last visit to Brussels and the President's 
to Budapest won applause from the Central Europeans' 
precisely because we created the impression that things 
were moving briskly -- hence Kozyrev's tantrum. The Vice 
President's visit to Moscow was successful because he 
conveyed the impression that things actually aren't moving 
that fast after all (as I write this over the weekend, I'm 
holding my breath to see what sort of blowback we're going 
to get from Warsaw and Prague). 
In fact, it will take time for NATO to agree on the terms 
timetable and list of new members; it will take time for the 
new members to be ready to assume the responsibilities of 
membership; it will take time to convince the U.S. Senate and 
15 European parliaments to ratify the deal. That time, 
meanwhile, can be put to good use crafting a mutually 
beneficial relationship between NATO and Russia. 
Our problem in the days and weeks and months ahead is going 
to be finetuning understandings and expectations so that 
audiences on Capitol Hill, in Western Europe, in Central Europe 
and in the former Soviet Union are all hearing the same message 
-- and so that what they're hearing makes sense in terms of a 
sustainable, long-term strategy. 
The Kozyrev Syndrome 
In my last memo to you, I referred to this as the Rodney 
("I get no respect") Dangerfield Syndrome. Andrei represents 
an important part of what we're dealing with in the Russian 
psychology: a determination to define Russian interests in a 
way that proves Russian independence, thatre-establishes 
Russia as a great power, and that puts the lie to the 
perception (and,.in Russia, the self-perception) that the 
Russian people have suffered a massive defeat and are now on 
some kind of probation in the eyes in the world. This is a 
problem because it means that in addition to the inherent 
differences in strategic interest, the Russians will be looking 
for points on which to cross us -- just to prove that they're 
not our lackeys. 
It's all the more of a problem, of course, because the 
troublesome perception/self-perception is, to a significant 
extent, true: Russia is both a "new independent state" and the 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 4]
C O6 8 3 5 9 26 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 4 - 
successor state to the USSR; the people who are now trying to 
reimpose Russian control over Chechnya are many of the same 
folks who brought us Afghanistan. Russia wants a clean break 
with the past only insofar as that means access to the G-7, 
complete relief from Jackson-Vanik, admission to the post-Cold 
War COCOM successor regime, equal status and influence with the 
U.S. in the Middle East and the Security Council, and so on. 
At some level, often quite close to the surface, Kozyrev 
recognizes this contradiction. Indeed, he embodies it. He is, 
after all, a true liberal and Westernizer in the context of 
Russian politics and history. He describes himself as being 
"ideologically pro-American"; he is proud of having been part 
of the "revolution" that "crushed Soviet communism." But he 
also speaks about how "vestiges of the old system remain," 
about how the Russian military cannot get it out of its head 
that NATO is the enemy. 
In my effort to persuade him to be a little less combative 
in his attitude and behavior, I tried this line of argument on 
him: from the standpoint of America's strategic interest in 
the evolution of a democratic, stable Russia integrated into 
the international community, the Yeltsin-Chernomyrdin-Kozyrev. 
leadership is probably about the best we could hope for in the 
mid-1990s. Andrei assented enthusiastically in that 
proposition: "So make it easier on us!" 
But if the U.S.-Russian relationship under present 
management on both sides is a "marriage made in heaven," he 
warned that "even the best marriages can be ruined in the , 
kitchen." He said several times that the "devil is in the 
details," and he believes we're screwing up constantly on the 
details. By which he means, we're not cutting them -- and him 
--enough slack; we're insisting on having everything our way. 
It was against that backdrop that he gave me his version of 
what happened at Budapest. He intended his account to 
illustrate his many complaints against us, but in one respect, 
it had the effect of a confession: essentially, he admits that 
he spun Yeltsin up with what can only be described as a 
mischievous, vindictive interpretation of the NAC communique; 
he succeeded too. well, got scared Aas he indicated to you with 
his remark about the need to prevent "things from getting out 
of control"), worked hard to spin Yeltsin back down and assure 
the success of the Vice President's trip, and is now preparing 
to engage with you in what could be an extremely valuable 
negotiation. In short, Andrei has been, once again, both part 
of the problem and part of the solution. 
5ECR 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 5]
C O6 8 3 59 2 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 5 - 
He all but acknowledges that part of his motive for 
double-crossing us in the Brussels signing ceremony was 
revenge: he is s.tiil smarting over the way he feels he was 
handled over his mission to Baghdad and our refusal to hold 
UNSC action until he arrived in New York. He's convinced that 
he got something worthwhile from Saddam on that trip -- "Iraq's 
recognition of Kuwait counts foe—something!" -- but "whenever 
there's a smell of success on our side, there's just a 
stonewalling, humiliating reaction from your side." 
This was in the context of a larger appeal that we give him 
"a foreign-policy success somewhere, for me and for President 
Yeltsin." He repeated this plea several times during our 
conversation, saying that every time he achieves something or 
is on the verge of doing so, there's "some stupid remark about 
`imperialism.' Whenever the State Department or White House 
spokesmen open their mouths on what we're trying to do in our 
foreign policy, they sound like Pravda ten years ago when it 
was spewing venom about American imperialism and the arrogance 
of power." 
He complains that our concept of "partnership" means to us 
that we give him orders and he obeys. When he asks for 
something in return, we give him a hard time. 
(He had an example at hand: it was a cable from Lavrov 
in New York in a red binder. The issue was the UNSC 
resolution on Tajikistan. A hangup had developed over 
the "welcoming language." Lavrov wanted the phrase 
"expresses satisfaction," but the U.S. was holding out 
for "notes positively." Kozyrev went on a real tear 
about this, saying that this was "diplomacy by ordeal, 
diplOmacy by blackmail. I can't, with all my 
pro-Americanism, see this in a positive light." The 
U.S., he said, "is deliberately trying to humiliate 
us, to put us in a corner." 
(That evening I checked with Peter on the facts which 
were, predictably, more complicated. My impression 
that the wrangle over language was minor and that the 
resolution has since moved forward. I dwell on the 
incident here because, God knows, Andrei did, and it 
illustrates what looks to him like a double standard.) 
He made no bones about his intention to play tit-for-tat 
with us: "How can i vote for 500 observers in Haiti when the 
U.S. demands it if you then do this kind of thing to us on 
Tajikistan?" 
—S4GRE-T—
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 6]
C O6 8 3 5 9 26 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021 
SECRET 
- 6 - 
His general point, as you've read in Toby Gati's reports on 
earlier such encounters, is that he's not getting fair 
treatment: "I can't stand being seen not as a partner but as a 
servant of the U.S., whose role is just to salute and say 'Yes, 
sir!'" 
A11 this was by way of making clear that he was, as he 
approached the Brussels meeting, looking for a chance to get 
back at us for Iraq and other perceived instances of 
Kozyrev-abuse. 
Now, here is where his hurt feelings and outrage began to 
give way to contrition. He admits that we had briefed him and 
his colleagues on numerous occasions and through multiple 
channels on what was going to be in the NAC Communique. I 
reviewed the record for him, and he didn't deny any part of 
it. His come-back is that the reference in the Communique to 
1995 lent itself to the interpretation on the Russian side that 
we were accelerating the timetable in general and that there 
might be concrete steps toward actual expansion that year. The 
latter assertion is patent nonsense, since the Communique makes 
clear that nothing is going to happen in '95 except briefings 
for PFP rnembers on "how" and "why." 
Andrei then claimed that the "context" of the NAC meeting 
--what was being said by "commentators on both sides of the 
Atlantic" -- created the impression that the U.S. was "shifting 
from an emphasis on partnership and integration to one on 
enlargement." 
In fact, all our briefings for the Russians had made clear 
A) that we were pursuing expansion as part of a larger strategy 
of integration (our President's principal message to Yeltsin in 
September), and B) that the plan for '95 is confined to 
transparent, inclusive briefings, with no decision or timetable 
for actual expansion. 
Andrei then confirmed something else we've already been 
aware of: the West Europeans were doing quite a bit of 
bad-mouthing of our position, saying to the Russians, "Your 
problem is not with us -- it's with the Americans; they're the 
ones pushing expansion." So now Andrei saw a chance to conduct 
a splitting maneuver. 
Enter Yeltsin. He had, according to Kozyrev, paid little 
attention to the NATO issue since'he'd been in Washington in 
September. Whenever Kozyrev or Grachev came to him and said 
that the Americans were moving fast, Yeltsin would wave them 
off, saying he trusted the assurances he'd gotten from Clinton. 
—ffittlitttE—
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 7]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 26 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021 
5ECRET 
- 7 - 
Kozyrev called Yeltsin just before Brussels and said, "I've 
got a report that the Americans are pushing a timetable in 
Brussels." Again, Yeltsin said, "Don't worry. I have 
Clinton's word." 
when ITAR-TASS moved a ticker report on the Communique 
itself, Yeltsin and Kozyrev talked on the phone. Kozyrev told 
him tliat the document went beyond what"Clinton had promised: 
"We'd agreed on Partnership for Peace -- long-term, important, 
substantive in itself. For the time being, we thought the 
emphasis would be on partnership. Now that suddenly seemed to 
have changed. I was invited to breakfast but I was served a 
dinner. Maybe it was a very nourishing meal, but it's not what 
I'd been led to expect." 
In that conversation, Yeltsim asked, "What's happened to my 
friend Clinton? Why is he doing this to us?" 
So Yeltsin headed toward Budapest with his dukes up. When 
he got there, he heard Clinton, in his own speech, say 
something to the effect that "expansion is now under way" (I 
will check the exact language). That, combined with several 
references to how no one would have a veto over the process, 
made the Russians feel that their noses were being rubbed in a 
concession they'd never,really made. As Kozyrev put it, "The 
combination of the content of the Brussels Communique itself 
and the tone of what Clinton said in Budapest made us feel that 
you were triumphing, you'd scored a diplomatic victory over us, 
you were ramming this through over Russian objections. But 
most important, it now looked that partnership was subsidiary 
to enlargement and Partnership for Peace was by the boards." 
His own confusion and anger fanned by Kozyrev, Yeltsin went 
into a roaring fit. He personally toughened up the speech that 
had been prepared for him by his own speechwriters and by the 
Foreign Ministry. Kozyrev claims he tried to dissuade Yeltsin 
from publ.icly attacking Clinton: "I told him I'd made a scandal 
in Brussels, so he could afford to be presidential in 
Budapest: But he felt betrayed and trapped, and this was his 
way of dealing with it." 
Since then, there's be.en more European finger-pointing 
against us: "All the NATO countries put the blame on Washington 
for the push to enlarge." 
This means, among other tasks before us, that we need to do 
a lot more spadework with the Allies on our NATO expansion 
plan; we can't have that issue become yet another point of 
tension within the Alliance. 
CECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 8]
C O6 8 3 59 26 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 8 - 
But the most important and most disturbing insight I had 
after listening to Kozyrev.was what it said about how the 
Russian leadership is operating now. We've seen for months, 
particularly in recent weeks, intelligence reports indicating 
that Yeltsin is isolated, behaving capriciously, and that his 
inner circle is running scared in several different directions 
at once. The Clinton-Yeltsin channel obviously remains key, 
but -- for reasons having to do with the weirdnesses going on 
in Moscow -- it's not completely reliable. • 
That's why we need to work other channels as well. Tom 
Pickering is truly doing a terrific job of establishing points 
of contact throughout the executive and legislative branches. 
We've got to work the Parliament hard. It was excellent that 
the vP saw both Rybkin and Shumeiko, the leaders of the lower 
and upper houses respectively. 
The Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission also figures prominently 
--and, I believe, very promisingly -- in our strategy. It was 
an extraordinary thing last week to see all those ministers of 
the Russian government across from their American 
counterparts. Slowly but surely, we really are 
institutionalizing our engagement with, and influence over, the 
Russian political and economic system. This in itself is a 
powerful hedge against the vicissitudes of Yeltsin's own 
management style, not to mention the uncertainties of his 
future. 
That still leaves an especially heavy burden on the 
Christopher-Kozyrev channel. The next couple of months are 
key. During the next week`or so, I would propose to have a 
small team get to work on this so that by the time you come 
back from your holiday, you will have a workplan to look at on 
paper. 
—SZGRET-
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 9]
C O 6 8 3 5 92 6:IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021 
ti-
- 9 - 
CC: P - Mr. Tarnoff 
Mr. Donilon 
S/NIS - Mr. Collins 
EUR - Amb. Holbro,oke 
INR - Mrs. Gati 
S/P - Mr. Steinberg 
OVP - Mr. Fuerth 
NSC - Mr. Berger 
NSC - Nick Burns 
SECRET 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835926 Date: 11/17/2021