[Page 1]
c O 6 8 3 5 9 3 9=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835939 Date: 11/17/2021 
March 11, 1994 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Chris: 
I am taking advantage of Jim Collins to transmit this to you 
through what I call "the Liz channel" -- that is, truly for your 
eyes only. It's a report on the hour-plus meeting in the Oval 
Office Friday on foreign policy. Present were the VP, Tony, Bill 
Perry and myself. 
As with my lunch the day before with Berger, Fuerth and 
Deutch, virtually the entire conversation was devoted to Korea. 
The topic had not even been on the agenda (which was Russia, Haiti, 
and peacekeeping). Bill Perry and I were sufficiently concerned 
about Korea to ask Tony to raise that subject early. Tony did so 
by asking Bill to summarize his concern. Bill said he saw a "train 
wreck" coming over Patriots and Team Spirit. We are, he said, 
heading into a situation in which we'd either end up in a huge 
fight with our Allies over how to protect our own,troops, or we'd 
back down -- pulling back Patriot deployment and cancelling Team 
Spirit under terms that didn't meet the original condition we'd 
imposed for doing so. 
That got us into a discussion of conflicting priorities 
between the ROK and the US: our No. 1 concern is a non-nuclear 
Korean peninsula; theirs, is no war. 
The President said that while our objective is obviously 
critical, we've got to keep in mind horrendous casualties the ROK 
would suffer. As he put, North Korea "has a Model A economy and a 
Cadillac military." He commented that every projection he's seen 
indicates we'd win the war, but the ROK would undergo terrible 
devastation in the initial stages. He then said we had to be much 
more careful about "rhetoric," making sure that it coincided with 
reality and our practical options. . 
We discussed how the dilemma we faced might be described as 
having to steer between two dangers -- a replay of Harlan County 
(sending the Patriots, then pulling them back) and a replay of 
Mogadishu (being perceived as refusing the local US commander's 
request for equipment necessary to protect his men). 
The VP asked if there weren't ways we could set up a "pincer 
movement with the Japanese" against South Korea; that is, getting 
the Japanese to join us in putting pressure on South Korea to hold 
the line more firmly. The Japanese share our priority concern with 
keeping the peninsula from going nuclear. 
Bill said he, too, wanted to find more ways of exerting 
leverage over the South Koreans. The President, at this point in 
the conversation, was clearly a bit wary of casting this issue in 
terms of us trying to get the South Koreans to do something they 
didn't want to do -- especially if that "something" increased the 
chances of a war in which Seoul would suffer terrible destruction 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835939 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
co 6835 93 9=IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06836939 Date: 11/17/2021 
in the opening days and hours. 
We talked about the need for care in resorting to any tactic 
that creates the impression in Seoul that the US and Japan are 
ganging up against them, especially given their neuralgia about 
Japan and the history of colonialism and occupation. 
The VP said, yes, we had to be sensitive to that, but there 
was too much at stake here for us to do anything that jeopardized 
our own troops, even if avoiding that danger meant "hurting the 
South Koreans' feelings." The "overriding consideration" should be 
protecting our troops. 
We also discussed how we may have, to date, underestimated a 
difficult ingredient in the dynamic in the situation: Korean 
nationalism, transcending the divide between North and South. It 
would be ironic and dangerous indeed if we were to get into a 
situation in which the South and North Koreans found themselves, in 
even the slightest way, on common ground against us and the 
Japanese. 
We also discussed, without any terribly compelling conclusion, 
the whole issue of post-Kim Il Sung succession and eventual 
unification and how those subjects of conjecture may be affecting 
the thinking of both the ROK and PDRK. 
That led to talk of whether we were getting our message across 
as clearly as we should at the right level in both Korean capitals. 
The President asked about whether we should resort again to the 
Billy Graham channel to Kim Il Sung. (The President is fascinated 
by the intelligence community's speculation that Kim is thinking a 
lot about his mother, who was a devout Christian, and, as the 
President put it, "hedging his bets a bit" as he nears the end of 
his life.) 
Bill Perry reported on soundings he's made on the Hill, which 
indicate that there are two, somewhat contradictory concerns: 
first, don't do anything that's too provocative in the eyes of the 
North (result: we don't send the Patriots); and second, don't do 
anything that in any way undercuts the safety of our troops 
(result: we do send Patriots). 
Bill also reported on his sense of the mood in Seoul, which is 
overwhelmingly anti-Patriot. He related a story he'd just heard 
about a meeting between Kim Young Sam and the ROK Defense Minister 
in which a letter was submitted warning about the danger posed to 
the ROK's security if Patriot deployment goes ahead; according to 
this story, either President Kint or his Defense Minister threatened 
to resign of the Patriots came ahead. (It wasn't clear which one, 
but the point is the same: this is a really explosive issue for the 
ROK leadership.) 
Tony said that next steps should include 1) finding a channel 
to Kim Il Sung; 2) improving our consultaitons with ROK; and 3) 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835939 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
c O 6 8 3 5 9 3 9FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835939 Date: 11/17/2021 
developing a public-diplomacy offensive targeted on South Korean 
public opinion, since the press there "is even more irresponsible 
and hysterical than our own." 
The President was very impressed by a Hoagland piece in 
Thursday's Post, which argued for a strategy of "containment" of 
North Korea and its nuclear program,. stringing the process out 
until North Korea mellows or collapses or joins the South or 
whatever. 
The President said in general, we needed to look for ways to 
induce better North Korean behavior with the prospect of 
"engagement." 
Bill did not dispute that as a strategy, but warned again that 
we must not do anything that either plays into the PDRK's 
"extortion" techique or allows the ROK to do so. 
That led to further talk about how difficult things were going 
to be with the ROK, and Tony commented, "The bigger problem for us 
right now is Seoul/ not Pyongyang." 
We contemplated the truly dreadful possibility that the 
current situation could ripen into one in which we'd be forced to 
withdraw our forces from South Korea altogether, because the South.
Koreans wouldn't let us defend them properly -- or defend our own 
troops there. 
Bill said this was no doubt part of the PDRK objective, and we 
must not under any circumstances allow them to achieve it. 
We discussed the possibility of a presidential letter to 
President Kim of South Korea, ,which Tony urged and the President 
agreed to do. 
Just before breaking up, we spent a few minutes on the 
Nixon/Yeltsin flap; the VP said that Nixon & Simes were stupid and 
provocative to have scheduled their meeting with Rutskoi ahead of 
the one w/ Yeltsin. But the real lesson of the episode is that it 
underscored how Yeltsin is peevish, losing his grip, .throwing 
tantrums, surprising his staff, etc., which in turn underscores the 
need to shore up our relations with other leaders. We talked a bit 
about your channel with Kozyrev, how'sgood it is that you're meeting 
with him Monday. 
The Vice President feels we should intensify and broaden the 
Gore-Chernomyrdin channel, including on some foreign policy issues. 
(This last point, it was recognized, requires lots of further 
discussion with you and careful managements.) 
On the Russians in the Middle East, the President and Vice 
President fully recognized how troublesome Kozyrev's whirling 
around this week has been. But they both expressed the view that 
we should keep trying to make sure that the Russians are included 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835939 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 4]
c 6 8 3 59 3 93IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835939 Date: 11/17/2021 
in the diplomacy. The President said.he wants us to go the "extra 
mile" in being accommodating to the Russians on the Middle East, 
partly "to keep them from going off the reservation." 
On peacekeeping, the President is very frustrated on this 
subject. He sees the importance of the issue, but "the problem 
is we've got no walking-around money for this kind of thing." We 
discussed the possible opportunity of selling peacekeeping on the 
Hill in the context of Bosnia. Bill reported that in his phone 
conversation with Nunn on the Macedonia augmentation, he got a 
pretty clear warning that we're going to have to engage with the Hill 
soon and in a major, serious way on what lies ahead, what the 
rules are going to be, where the fudning is going to come from,. 
etc. (I got the same message from Lugar when I called him at 
Wendy's behest about Macedonia.) Perhaps, in that effort, we 
can give some Presidential impetus to peacdseeping globally. 
""J4As we broke up to-ID,6te(the PresideMt-1s announcement on the 
Hemisphere Summit in Miami, that made him raise Haiti, which is 
on his mind because he's getting signals that we face a problem "on the 
left" with regard to Haiti. He said that Joe Lieberman reported 
that he was hearing fromsliberals in Connecticut who had been 
enERgetic on the E1 Salvador issue in the '80s that they're 
upset with us over Haiti, presumably for backing away from 
Aristide. The President said he could imagine "50,000 Haitians 
showing up" just at the time of the Miami summit. Not surprisingly, 
he's suggested that Haiti be the princtipal item of business at 
the next meeting he has with you, Tony and Bi11.
Good luck w/ Kozyrev, and 
have a safe trip home. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835939 Date: 11/17/2021