[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 5 26 4IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835264 Date: 11/17/2021 
[RELEASE IN FULL] 
Personal and Confidential 
Haiti - Rethinking 
1. Using military force in order to try to deal with the present stalemate would have 
foreseeable serious consequences. Some American casualties cannot be avoided. There 
is very substantial public and congressional opposition to the use of American troops for 
this purpose. Once we intervene militarily, we can't avoid further responsibility for what 
happens subsequently or for the country's future. If a framework is not put in place for 
governance, we could find ourselves in anything from civil war to military occupation. 
2. Obtaining United Nations authorization for the use of such force to oust Cedras, et al 
would meet some of the objections but would still lead to serious problems and 
consequences. It would dissipate international objections and criticism and perhaps 
facilitate participation by other nations. It might also diminish domestic opposition to the 
use of American troops. It would also constitute legal justification for what could 
appropriately be called "collective intervention". But American casualties would still 
occur; we would still be under an obligation for Haiti's future; and it would open a post-
invasion Pandora's box. 
3. The only alternative to use of military force seems to be reexamining the possibility of 
negotiation. Until now, an integral part of American policy has been the restoration of 
Aristide to power. But that will not resolve Haiti's political problems. And the 
restoration of Aristide in  a bitterly  divided country will not put  him in a_Tosition to _ 
govern effectiVely. 
4. At the heart of this matter may well be the fact that we have talked about restoration 
rather than reconciliation. It is now clear, however, that to restore Aristide to the 
Presidency unaccompanied by reconciliation will simply not work. Fear, distrust, 
intolerance and violence are so deeply ingrained that without some prior agreement in 
place for consensus-building or reconciliation, the reinstalling of Aristide in the 
Presidency would very likely only mean continued instability in Haiti for years to come. 
5. It seems to me that we are, therefore, at a point where Aristide must hear clearly and 
unequivocally that he must join in trying to find a basis for reconciliation. The fact that 
this has failed in the past does not necessarily mean that a new negotiation strategy will 
not work. What was notable about the Governor's Island Agreement is not that it failed, 
but that it so very nearly succeeded. Indications are that with more unified support and 
backing, and some reformulation, it might well have worked. 
6. All of this suggests that a new negotiation effort should be undertaken. The basic goal 
would be an agreement among Aristide and his supporters, parliamentary leaders, 
legitimate political and civic leaders, and the military as an institution to establish a 
Government of National Concord. The purpose would be to lay the groundwork for 
constitutional rule in Haiti. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835264 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 5 2 6 4 d RED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835264 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 2 - 
7. The main elements' of such an agreement among the parties might be these: 
a. Immediate resignation and departure from Haiti of Cedras, Francois and Biamby. 
b. Amnesty provisions for military and police personnel 
c. Appointment by Aristide of a Prime Minister (as required by the Constitution) 
agreeable to the other parties. 
d. The embargo to remain in force until after Cedras, et al, leave and a new Prime 
Minister takes over. 
e. Early return of Aristide who would rule as President for the balance of his 
designated term. 
f. Permissive presence of a UN Multinational Peace-keeping Force which would 
arrive prior to the departure of Cedras, et al, to supervise the transition to Aristide. 
g. The Peace-keeping Force to stay in place to oversee compliance with the 
agreement and to help maintain order until the next presidential election. 
h. An-international economic and development effort would be mounted to assist the 
governmerit. 
Of course, there is no insurance that such a negotiation would be successful. It would, 
however, represent a last effort by the United States and the international community to avoid 
a military approach, and the negotiating conference might be lauhched under the aegis of the 
Secretaries General of the UN and of the OAS, and the Friends of Haiti. We ought to try the 
negotiating approach before we decide that we have no alternative to military force. Thus far, 
the American people are not persuaded that the use of force is the only alternative left 
Sol M. Linowitz July 27, 1994 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835264 Date: 11/17/2021