[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 4 8 8 O ASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06834880 Date: 11/17/2021 
os Angelo gimes RELEASE IN FULL 
 Commentary 
The U.N. Needs a Little Help From Its Friend 
Overhaul the world 
organization, which is 
badly managed and 
tends to react rather 
than take'action. 
By CATHERINE O'NEILL 
• 
Iremember, as a young college graduate driving 
bhi.'fifigh small towns in Texas 30 years ago, seeing 
illboards saying "Get the U.S. out of the U.N." 
Then, theUnited Nations was wórrisome to many . 
Ainerieins caught up in Cold War amdety, a place 
where communists were members and even had veto 
• piq.rer in the Security Council.' 
' • Today "the Commies" are gone,and so is the 
vitriolic hatred. Nol;v the United Nations is threatened 
- bkndifference. Nearing its 50th birthday, the United 
Nations is somewhat flabby and out of shape. It needs ' 
ari overhaul, and it needs a new generation to become 
excited about its possibilities. 
In theUnited States, we have come to see the United 
Nations as a crisis manager, to be called on to swoop in , 
when we can no longer watch international suffering 
on television without feeling that we are doing , 
something about it. Or to pass a resolution supporting 
military action when the United States does not want 
, to be criticized for going it alone. 
That rdle is a far cry from the visionary dreams of 
the U.N. founders, who saw it as an instrument to 
support a world without war and to move countries 
and families out of poverty. The current movement for , 
reform at the United Nations is coming most loudly ,. 
from those who want it to thrive and adapt to the 
post-Cold War realities. That renewal movement 
recently picked up an important advocate. 
Last month, President Clinton spoke to the General 
Assembly proposing a "year of renewal" at the United 
Nations. He talked of planning for the next 50 years, 
and suggested having a "civilian rapid-response force 
for humanitarian conflicts" and a "ready, efficient and 
; capable" peacekeeping force. He seemed prepared for 
the United,States to roll up its sleeves and participate 
in that much-needed U.N. overhaul. .,i;:*';; . 
Clinton's commitment to U.N. renevial carries-with 
it the possibility of revitalizing an organization too 
; important to be allowed to shrivel into a debating 2 • 
society.,The United Nations, in its current. ;: 
configuration, would fail a professional management ' 
scrutiny. There are oyerlapping responsibilities in 
different agencies. There is a struggle for turf ' 
protection and there has been a failure to include 
women in senior Managenient. One of the biggest " • 
problemsis that it has become too reactive. CNN's 
cameras are setting the hunianitarian agenda. There, 
are people suffering horribly all Over the globe,but too 
; often the relief effort is directed to the area where the 
cameras have gone and others are ignored. • . . 
. Among those who know the United Nations best and 
care most about its survival, there is motivated talk.
about changing the old ways. This month's issue of 
Foreign Affairs magazine has several articles about 
ways to make the United Nations more efficient in 
• peacekeeping and mediation. More effective U.N. 
• humanitarian response is the subject of Ford 
Foundation studies, and political journals discuss ways.
to change the outdated Security Council.membership • 
to better reflect today's world. 
- This is Clinton's moment for leadership. As the " 
world's current reigning superpower, U.S.. 
invOlvement is critical for U.N. change. The President • 
should work on reforming the United Nations in the • ; 
light'of how history-Lnot toporroW,'s headlines7  will • 
judge his tenure. If we were creating the United • 
Nations today, how would we shape it? What would 
we have it do? Wherewould it get funding? 
-Most of us want to leave the wdrld a better place. 
That was the motivation of the founding U.N. 
mernbers, who adopted a charter that begins,,"We the 
peoPleS of the United Nations are determined to save 
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, to 
reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights and to 
promote social progress.". • 
The United Nations can be more effective in 
working toward those goals, but it needs help from its 
friends and leadership from the United States. 
Catherine O'Neill of Los Angeles has participated in 
U.N. meetings. in Asia, Africa, Europe and the United 
States. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06834880 Date: 11/17/2021