[Page 1]
c O6 8 3 5 9 3 2 :IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835932 Date: 11/17/2021 
United States. Department of State 
•The Deputy Secretary of State 
Washington, D.C. 20520 RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIEDDECL :OADR 
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY 
FROM: Strobe Talbot 
SUBJECT: Moving Ahead on Haiti 
The Deputies Committee had an unusually productive 
four-hour meeting on Haiti last Saturday. •Bill Swing came from 
Naiti, and Jack Sheehan, the new CINC at Atlantic Command, also 
attended. We reviewed the military situation, the police 
program, aid and economic issues, prospects for legislative 
elections, and plans for the transfer to UNMIH. 
Haiti is relatively tranquil, but security depends almost 
exclusively on American troops. 
The process of vetting and training FAD'H enlisted 
personnel to act as an Interim Police Force is proceeding 
well. By Christmas we will have retrained 3000 vetted FAD'H to 
take on this job. In January the Police Academy will begin 
courses for the new civilian police. 
The process of vetting the FAD'H'officer corps is less 
advanced. Too many people with questionable records remain, 
and a few have even been promoted by Aristide. 
The International Police Monitors (IPM) are functioning 
remarkably well. Money to pay and support them, however, is 
running out. We will not be able to fully deploy the IPM.'s 
into the countryside unless about $20 million in additional 
funding is found. 
The economic picture is mixed. International aid is 
flowing, but investment is not. We need US policy decisions on 
several key trade and investment issues. 
The dialogue with the UN on the UNMIH transition issue has 
begun, but we need to answer two basic questions before it can 
proceed much further -- when do we want the hand off to take 
place, and what is the size and shape of the US troop 
contingent we are willing to leave behind. 
Addressing each of these issues, the Deputies decided to: 
—COTIFTDEttrilit--
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
10/20/2020 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835932 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
c O 6 8 3 5 9 3 2 1ED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835932 Date: 11/17/2021 
— 5221tr 
- 2 - 
c 
Give priority to working out with Aristide a system for 
vetting the FAD'H officer corps, and for discharging or at 
least marginalizing those officers with the worst record. 
Several of these, unfortunately, are long time supporters 
of President Aristide. 
Deploy the IPM's into the countryside, providing additional 
money can be found. 
Seek funds for this purpose from other governments, 
including Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Kuwait and Germany. 
Pull together, for announcement during the Summit of the 
Americas, a set of trade and investment initiatives for 
Haiti, including, if possible, the opening of OPIC and EXIM 
Bank lending facilities, creation of an Enterprise Fund for 
Haiti, and liberalization of Haiti's textile quota. 
Continue to urge the Haitians to schedule early legislative 
elections, but also; 
Consider delinking the MNF/UNMIH transfer from the holding 
of elections, seeking instead a UN agreement to a firm 
date, perhaps in March, for the hand off. 
Move toward meeting the UN's request for a robust US 
contribution to UNMIH, to include Special Forces and 
Military Police, in exchange for a UN agreement on an early 
transfer of responsibility. 
Prepare an emergency supplemental request, for submission 
to Congress early next year, to replenish State, AID and 
DOD for Haiti related expenditures. 
Revive White House led interagency coordination of Haiti 
public affairs and Congressional strategy. 
Our early success, the subsequent slowness with which the 
Government of Haiti organized itself, and most recently the 
prospect of a more hostile Congress have combined to slow the 
momentum of our Haiti policy. Sandy Berger, John Deutch Land I 
used this meeting, therefore, to reinvigorate the process. 
Sandy stressed that the critical moment at which -the success or 
failure of our policy in Haiti can be judged will come, not 
when the MNF hands off to UNMIN; but a year later, when UNMIH 
hands off to a new Haitian Government. Despite the changes on 
Capitol Hill, therefore, 'we all agreed this is a time not to 
cut our losses, but to redouble our efforts. 
At Bill Swing's urging, Sandy and I are considering a short 
visit to Haiti next week to give Aristide and his new Prime 
Minister a similar message -- that our resolve to support the 
consolidation of democracy in Haiti is undiminished, but that 
it is important to move forward briskly on our common agenda --
e.g., cleaning out the FAD'H, holding elections, and turning 
the MNF's responsibilities over to UNMIH. 
- C 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835932 Date: 11/17/2021