[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 5 92 83IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835928 Date: 11/17/2021 
/6 ,r/4-/ 
)7;>t( -r---' 
Friday, April 29, 1994 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Chris: 
I'm resorting to this long-distance version of the true 
your-eyes-only channel in order to bring you up to date on 
thinking at the White House and elsewhere on Haiti. 
The pickle in which we find ourselves is turning more 
sour. The broadened, intensified sanctions regime that we 
rolled out this week is playing to arched eyebrows and yawns 
from most; defiant smirks from Cedras & Co.; and to impassioned 
denunciations and calls for intervention from the Black Caucus. 
The press and many on the Hill see no decisive difference 
between the new sanctions and the old ones. They're skeptical 
that these will work where the old ones failed. This is the 
majority view. It's held by people who are in many cases 
opposed to i,ntervention (or at least who would need a lot of 
persuading) and unenamored of Aristide. But these are also 
people who are increasingly critical of the Administration's 
foreign policy as being prone to bluffs when it comes to 
standing up to thugs. So we're paying a price with this 
constituency and accumulating vulnerability. 
I should also tell you that our own experts (Alec Watson's 
working group) are deeply concerned that the sanctions alone 
won'.t work, not least because the military leaders in Port au 
Prince profit from the smuggling and blackmarketeering that 
sanctions make such a boom business. 
No doubt in part for that very reason, Cedras et al. are 
sending signals through Ambassador Swing and others that they 
are unimpressed by the prospect of the new sanctions, and that 
they may retaliate by hindering the proposed increase in 
humanitarian assistance and human-right monitoring. 
The Black Caucus is in a fury over direct-return and what 
they believe to be our refusal to consider the use of force. 
The fact is, of course, we have not ruled out force. we 
adopted the course we're on believing that we had to take full 
advantage of all the diplomatic, political and economic 
instruments available to us in order to justify, both 
internationally and domestically, the use of force as a last 
resort -- which is to say, as a final, determinative instrument 
to add to the Others. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835928 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 2 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835928 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 2. - 
The problem is, that key aspect of our policy -- force as 
an option available to us as part of a continuum -- is 
invisible publicly. On MacNeil-Lehrer on Wednesday, Madeleine 
was asked whether force was an option; she left it on the 
table, but very subtly. Indeed, its very existence is 
doubted. And it is also the subject of the most intense debate 
internally -- so much so that I'm developing doubts myself 
about whether force really is available to us, given the 
resistance to the idea from the two institutions that can make 
it real. 
At this point, DoD -- particularly at the Walt Slocombe 
level -- is simply not willing to take any responsibility for 
maintaining internal order in Haiti, even on an interim basis. 
I had a one-on-one with the head of the other key 
institution this week. He has two responsibilities. One is to 
provide political analysis and prediction. The other is to 
make available to the President certain instrumentalities to 
carry out the President's decisions. His concept of Function A 
is so totally anti-Aristide as to hinder his ability to carry 
out Function B. If anything is clear in this whole murky 
business it is, after all, that the President has decided 
Aristide must return. 
This is background for the latest developments. Tony 
was very struck by Swing's cable on "the ultimate fallback 
option" (I'm asking the Ops Center to resend this to you). 
while reading the cable, Tony had the idea of developing a 
robust UNMIH, then going to Boutros-Ghali and, in effect, 
offering the services of the US military to insert the UNMIH 
into a "non-permissive environment," to evict the de factos, 
and then immediately to turn the running of the island•over to 
Aristide and UNMIH. Think of this as the l0lst Airborne 
carrying the UNMIH ashore on its backs. Think of it as Harlan 
County Redux, only this time it lands its passengers and 
carries Cedras & Co. off to retirement. Tony hopes/believes 
this could be done as a one-shot, short-duration (a week or 
so), large-scale (division level, perhaps) action that would 
have BBG's blessing, perhaps reinforced by the OAS's. 
He floated this past Bill Perry and me en route to the 
Nixon funeral and then, privatelk, past the President as well. 
The President told me later in the trip that he thought Tony 
had a good idea. Bill and I designated Slocombe and 
Jim Steinberg respectively to talk it all through with Tony, 
very close-hold. That meeting took place last night. It got 
nowhere, other than identifying some of the problems. What if 
BBG and/or other potential multilateral "partners" says no 
thank you? We're back in the box of proposing and being 
rejected. What do we do then? Throw up our hands? Act 
unilaterally? And if the latter, there will be no UNMIH to 
tidy up after the intervention. We'll have to do the tidying 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835928 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 2 8 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835928 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 3 - 
up ourselves. In which case, what will be seen as a US-only 
invasion will become a US-only occupation. The clear follow-on 
question is what impact a rejection of the plan by the 
international community would have on our own freedom of 
movement. Would it serve to block U.S. unilateral action, or 
would it liberate us .to go it alone? ("We tried 
multilateralism, they said no, so now we're taking 
responsibility for the neighborhood on ourselves" -- the 
Kozyrev in Georgia argument.) 
My own feeling is that something like the Swing/Lake idea 
is worth developing as the or-else endgame for the strategy the 
President has already approved (try tightened sanctions, with 
force as an option if necessary). What Tony notionally calls 
the l0lst Airborne could/should be the equivalent, in this 
instance, of NATO in Bosnia: a US-led military instrument to 
enforce the will of the international community. (I'd like it 
better if we could get, in advance, a hemispheric component --
Argentines and Jamaicans, perhaps.) While I still have deep 
reservations about going in unilaterally, I am increasingly 
convinced our plan needs to include a credible threat of force 
if we are going to convince Cedras and Co. that we are deadly 
serious on two points: at the end of the day, they will be out 
and Aristide will be back. 
But proceeding'in this direction requires the President to 
lay down the law to the two above-mentioned institutions: stop 
telling me why I can't do what I've decided to do -- tell me 
how i can do it. 
What is not an option, it seems to me, is the status quo. 
This week has made even clearer to me than before that the 
President is determined not to let Cedras & Co.'s defiance 
stand. He really is acutely uncomfortable with direct-return; 
he recognizes that the tightened sanctions will only increase 
the urgency of a resolution. 
Elaine Sciolino's piece today also clearly frustrated him. 
At the end of our foreign policy session this morning the 
President called Haiti a "classic example of how we can't let 
the press drive our policy. We can't let ourselves be driven 
into military action on anything just because Randall Robinson 
decides to kill himself. Last year the press was only talking 
to people who hated Aristide and getting all their information 
from the CIA. We'll just get hopelessly whip-sawed if we let 
the press and special interests drive us, instead of 
concentrating on doing the right thing." But there's no 
question what he thinks the right thing is: Cedras out, 
Aristide in. 
You should also know that there's a lot of restlessness 
among Democrats who fear that this Presidency is being 
"Carterized." John Kerry used that word with me yesterday and 
it's beginning to reverberate. As with another difficult 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835928 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 4]
C O6 8 3 5 92 8 :IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835928 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 4 - 
policy, Kerry is trying to "help." He went to see Aristide 
himself for two hours privately yesterday and, by his own 
account, broached with Aristide the idea that he might have to 
step aside or designate someone else to govern in his place or 
share power as part of a deal that would get rid of the de 
factos. You and I can both imagine how Aristide would react to 
this. Among other things, he'd probably suspect that Kerry is 
carrying a message from the President -- that our real policy 
is to dump him. 
So for that reason too, we're in real danger of losing 
control of this one. 
Against this backdrop, we're getting ready to roll out our 
peacekeeping policy. The success of that presentation -- not 
to mention the policy itself -- will depend in large measure on 
how we are able to answer the question: how does this apply to 
Bosnia and Haiti? We've got the right answer on this first, 
but not yet on the second. With your guidance, I'll do 
everything I can to move us in the right direction between now 
and your return, but I do think it's important that you be here 
for the unveiling of PD-13 on Thursday. 
Regards, 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835928 Date: 11/17/2021