[Page 1]
C O6 8 3 5 7 9 2 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835792 Date: 11/17/2021 
Lanny J. Davis 
RELEASE IN PART 
B6 
December 9, 1993 
President Bill Clinton 
Hon. Hillary Rodham Clinton 
The White House 
Washington, D.C. 
Dear Mr. President and Hillary: 
Carolyn and I appreciated your invitation to the PBS "In Performance..." event at the 
White House. It was great seeing both of you and having a brief chance to talk. 
Following my work in the vetting process during the transition, I returned to my 
comfortable private life with great hope and excitement over the Administration's agenda. A 
year has passed. You both have shown the courage in tackling problems our leaders have 
ignored for too long. Despite the media's focus on.the Administration's difficulties and 
challenges, I believe you have accomplished more in the first 12 months in dealing with the 
fundamental issues facing this country than did the two previous administrations in the last 12 
years. But I also know how hard fought the remaining agenda will be. And I've been on the 
sidelines long enough. I now realize more than ever how much I want to participate in this 
effort--and that I can help you. 
Since my arrival in Washington after law school graduation in 1970, I have gained 
experience and skills in four different worlds, each of which would be useful to you and the 
Administration : 
--I have built a law practice specializing in defense procurement litigation, commercial 
law, and public policy, and I have co-authored a leading text in the area of 
technology/computer-related law. 
--I have been involved in party and electoral politics at all levels. I have developed a 
valuable network of political friends and allies not only in Washirgton but throughout the 
country. 
--Through my regular political commentaries on WAMU-FM, an NPR affiliate here in 
Washington, as well as other writings in the Post and elsewhere, I have gained valuable 
experience and many friends in dealing with the national print and broadcast media. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835792 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 5 7 9 2 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835792 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 2 - 
--Finally, my experience in these three worlds has helped me in-various policy efforts 
before the Congress. As a result, through the years I have come to know well and work closely 
with many members of Congress and their staffs. As a lawyer, campaign manager, fund-raiser, 
speechwriter, Democratic nominee for Congress, media commentator, and three-term member of 
the Democratic National Committee from Maryland, I have learned the critical interaction 
between politics, communications, and policy and how to use them effectively for successful 
campaigns and for successful governance. 
As you may, remember, I began working for the campaign in the early fall of 1991. I 
decided this early because I believed in the changes and vision you both were presenting to the 
country. Now I am even more convinced of the importance of what you are doing. Leaving my 
law practice behind will involve the same sacrifice so many others have already made. But I 
now realize nothing means more to me than being part of this effort to redirect the country's 
priorities. 
Among our mutual friends who I believe would vouch for what I can do in the 
Administration, I would list Joe Lieberman, Harris Wofford, Steny Hoyer, Bill Richardson, 
Barney Frank, Ted Kennedy, Howard Paster, Al From, Kurt Schmoke, Richard Schifter (my first 
mentor in Montgomery County politics), Mike Barnes, and David Dunn. (Talk about political 
diversity!) Janet Reiro got to know me pretty well during that intense week when I headed up the 
vetting team, as did Jim Hamilton, Bernie Nussbaum and Ron Klain. I've enclosed my resume 
and a few of the letters which were written on my behalf during the transition period when I was 
hoping to obtain a subcabinet or White House staff position. 
I want to help you. I believe I can. 
My best wishes and support in the days and months ahead. 
Best regards, 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835792 Date: 11/17/2021