[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 5 9 4 l IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835941 Date: 11/17/2021 
October 18, 1994 
To: P - Mr. Tarnoff, T - Dr. Davis 
EUR - Amb. Holbrooke, S/NIS Mr. Collins 
Mr. Donilon 
From: Strobe Talbott 
,IRELEASE IN FULL 
Subject: NESA (that's "New European Security Architecture") 
Following up on the FSU Policy Steering Group meeting 
yesterday and preparing for my session with Mamedov in London, 
I've been reviewing several papers that our colleagues have 
prepared. I've got several reactions to them, and would be 
grateful if, in my absence, you'd feed back into the system my 
views. Also, as I travel, I'll continue to have plane time to 
read, think and even (God help you all!) write. So keep those 
NESA memos coming, even -- indeed, especially -- while I'm on the 
road. 
The Oct. 14 NSC Staff Paper on NATO Expansion 
-- In general, it strikes me as a useful contribution to our 
deliberations. I'd note, however, that it reflects a high degree 
of ambivalence, hence ambiguity, on the tricky but important 
subject of whether Russia is eligible for eventual membership in 
NATO. It speaks, for example, about how the "possibility of NATO 
membership for Ukraine and the Baltic States should be 
maintained" -- implying that sudh a possibility for Russia does 
not exist. We'd better be careful how we refine our talking and 
thinking points on this. The Ukrainians are already riding hard 
the line that theirs is a European country while Russia is not. 
(Believe it or not, an hour ago in the Gander waiting lounge I 
got into a fairly lively discussion on this subject with the crew 
of a Ukrainian military transport that's advancing the Kuchma 
visit to Canada!) I don't think we should let this particular 
point of differentiation creep into our catechism. 
There's a telling sentence to the effect that "Russia should 
not be ruled out explicitly" -- which, well, implies that it 
should be left out implicitly. We've got to be more 
sophisticated than that. 
-- Speaking of Ukraine, I assume if we're prepared to have 
an an "a/A" ("alliance with the Alliance") Russia and NATO we're 
also prepared to have ones between Ukraine and NATO. If so, why 
not, say, Kazakhstan? Or Belarus? Or the Baltics? We may come 
out believing that only Russia shoula have an "a/A." But we'll 
have to be careful how we handle that. We don't want to make 
those CEE/FSU states that aren't getting into NATO any time soon 
and that aren't getting their own separate deals with NATO feel 
even more insecure. At the same time, we don't want to work out 
1 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835941 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C O 6 8 3 5 9 41 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835941 Date: 11/17/2021 
an "exclusive" deal for Russia that makes it feel.that it's being 
set up for ultimate exclusion from NATO (going back to the point 
above). Yet that's the problem that is suggested by the 
parenthesis that refers to how we'd come up with some special 
arrangement for Russia that would "implicitly foreshadow 
`alliance with the Alliance' as an alternative to membership 
track." It seems to me that if we're going to make good-on our 
vow to resist'ruling Russia out of the Alliance, we'd better 
avoid formulations like this. 
-- On timing, the paper says that, "for our own planning 
purposes," we should shoot for a NATO decision on new members "no 
sooner than the first half of the second Clinton term." I'm not 
exactly sure what's going on there. It sounds like a re-spinning 
of Sandy Vershbow's Warsaw interview. Are we trying to dampen 
CEE expectations? Or appeal to them? And the notion that we can 
do anything "for our own planning purposes" without it becoming 
part of our public posture is highly questionable. 
-- The "during interim" points include the idea of "German 
solutions" on deployments. I have no doubt something like that 
will be necessary, but it'll also carry with it the perception of 
second-class status. 
-- What about the nuclear dimension that the Vice President 
and others have raised? Are we prepared to grasp the nettle now 
(of whether nukes will be deployed in Poland? And if the answer 
is -- as I think everyone agrees -- no, then should we grasp 
another nettle at the same time -- Greece/Turkey? 
John Kornblum's Oct. 7 paper on "The 8econd Track" 
An excellent piece of work in all respects except in one 
that's not John's fault: the first-rate analysis and 
conceptualization sets up an anticlimax in the recommendations. 
The ones contained here are a good start, but we're going to need 
a lot more, both qualitatively and quantitatively, if Budapest is 
going to meet the expectations in which we're couching our 
exhortation for the President to attend. In short, buys, this 
burger needs more beef! But before I slaughter a cow myself, a 
quibble or two about the preliminary section: 
On p. 2, there's a passage that suggests the CEE NATO 
-aspirants are looking for a way to "counteract the centrifugal 
forces now burdening Europe." That's true, of c9urse,-but their 
real, driving concern is not so much Balkanization as it is fear 
of Russian aggression. 
One of our toughest challenges is how to mute what the NSC 
paper calls the "insurance policy/strategic hedge" rationale for 
NATO expansion when it is so central to the motivations of the 
CEE states. We need do a lot more work on that. 
2 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835941 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
C O 6 8 3 5 9 41 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835941 Date: 11/17/2021 
The second on p. 3 about why POTUS should go to Budapest 
needs to be strengthened. Right now it says that 99% percent of 
the value is in his just showing up. Lots of luck with that line 
at the White House! 
For what it's worth -- and it's only among friends that I'd 
confess my ignorance here -- I'm clueless about this issue, 
raised on p. 6, of whether to "inject" the CSCE with a "legal 
personality" (a formulation that has a kind of Frankenstein ring 
to it). I'm totally puzzled by the passage about how 
transforming the CSCE into a formal organization would "take 
away" its most unique feature and its commitment-to human rights. 
In the next iteration of the paper, I'd like to see that spell 
out. And, insofar as I can guess at what's at issue here, I 
wonder if there isn't some way we could be a little more flexible 
and innovative, if "legalizing" CSCE would help achieve our 
overall objectives. 
On p. 5, there's a tantalizing paragraph about how we might 
be able to link, or leverage the CFE flanking issue in a way that 
would help bring the Russians along with expansion. Dick and 
Lynn made reference to this in yesterday's meeting. John Beyrle 
indicated it was very, very tough. But I really think we need to 
brainstorm that big-time. It has a lot of appeal, not least 
because it might be a way of resolving the CFE issue in its own 
right, which is really turning into a major pain. But any 
recommendations that our geniuses come up with must explain how 
we'll square the plan with the.Turks and the Norwegians. 
I'd also like to see some more proposals about how we might 
build on the Contact Group. (Down, Peter, down! -- just for 
discussion!)
Another mangy, only semi-tame dog that doesn't bark in this 
paper is the-CIS. The Russians keep asking for more status for 
the CIS, and we keep saying no. We're absolutely right to do so. 
We don't accept the proposition that the CIS is truly voluntary, 
given the way the Russians have bullied the Georgians and 
Azerbaijanis into returning to the fold -- and given the 
revealing fact that no member state other than Russia is pushing 
for the CIS to be "promoted." So while I'm not advocating a 
change in our policy on this, we do need to incorporate into our 
points a head-on rebuttal of the Russian demand. Our message to 
them, obviously, is that the integration we're offering them with 
the West is, in the long run, much more important than the 
benefits they see in the-reintegration of old Soviet Union or 
Russian Empire. 
3 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835941 Date: 11/17/2021