[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 5 6 9 9 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835699 Date: 11/17/2021 
REMARKS BY 
STROBE TALBOTT 
AT HIS SWEARING-IN 
AS DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE 
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1994 
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN ROOM, EIGHTH FLOOR 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Mr. Secretary, thank you for those kind remarks. 
I'm sorry to learn that that old article I wrote at 
Hotchkiss 30 years ago has now come to light and raised new 
questions about my fitness to serve. 
Knowing you, Chris, I'm sure you've personally and 
carefully read every word of the offending article -- and let 
me assure you that the whole thing was taken out of context. 
I am deeply honored that so many of you would be here 
today. 
This is a fairly large group, but that's in part because so 
many members of my family are here, not just up here in front, 
but scattered around the room. 
I've learned never to appear at a public or even 
semi-public, event without bringing reinforcements, especially 
if there are members of Congress present. 
Actually, I'm glad my family is here for another reason. 
They're an important part of my life, my work, and whatever 
capacity-I have to-take on this new assignment. Therefore ' 
please let me introduce a few of them. 
My parents, Jo and Bud Talbott, from Cleveland, whose 
interest in international affairs and activism in the cause of 
peace were important in forming the image of the world, and the 
model of citizenship, that took shape in my mind from earliest 
childhood. My sister Page from Philadelphia, is an art 
historian, who several years ago helped catalogue the antique 
furniture here in the diplomatic reception rooms. My other 
sister Marjo, will soon move to town to take up a much tougher 
job than mine, as head of the-Maret School. My brother Kirk, 
an environmental lawyer with the World Resources Institute, is 
the source of my modest knowledge of, but considerable concern 
for, the issues on which I will'be working with Tim Wirth, 
George Moose, and others. 
Let me also mention my parents-in-law, Marva, and Lloyd 
Shearer, and from whom I first heard about their fellow 
Angeleno, Warren Christopher, in the late 1960s, when I was 
hanging around Southern California courting their daughter. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835699 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 5 6 9 9;IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835699 Date: 11/17/2021 
- 2 - 
Brooke'is, of course, here today -- in every sense, at my 
side, as are my sons Devin and Adrian, who visit the Department 
from time to time for ceremonial events like this, and who are 
therefore beginning to wonder if their father ever does any 
serious work. 
There are others whom I would like to thank, notably 
several Senators who supported my nomination in a way that will 
last in my memory far longer than any other aspect of that 
bracing experience. The shock is behind me; I'll always be 
grateful for the therapy. 
So many of the rest of you merit mention but if I were to 
single you all out, I would quickly see, in my mind's eye, that 
red light bulb going on in front of Chairman Pell, telling me, 
in a fashion far less gracious than the Chairman himself, that 
my time is up. So if you notice me glancing nervously and 
obediently in Senator Pell's direction during the next few 
minutes, you'll know why. 
Before that light goes off, I'd like to make just three 
points. 
The first concerns this building, this institution, and the 
people who make it work. I came into government a big fan of 
the professional Civil and Foreign Service. You could even 
find some old columns in which I made that clear, but never 
mind. Some people have asked if, as the,Secretary's Deputy, 
I'm not going to feel torn between "administration" and 
"substance," between "policy" and "process." , The answer is 
no. In fact, the question is based on a false distinction. 
Helping the bureaus of the,Department be all that they can be 
-- making sure that they serve the Secretary and the President 
to the full extent of their formi'dable ability -- that is 
substance. 
The second point I want to make has to do with bad news --
that is, the adversity, if not the perversity, of events that 
complicate the formulation and implementation of policy. We 
have seen in recent months, and especially in recent days, 
vivid reminders of how unexpected developments can be like land 
mines or mortar shells, exploding along the path down which we 
are trying to lead our country, our allies, and the 
international community. 
We saw that dramatically in Hebron last week. We saw it 
yet again, in the spy case that put strains on U.S.-Russian 
relations when we did not need it. But what we've also seen, I 
think, is a national leadership that has both the fortitude and 
the sense of direction -- the sense of destinatiön -- to keep 
moving down the right path, despite the obstacles, diversions 
and setbacks along the way. ' 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835699 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 3]
C 0 6 8 3 5 6 9 9 IFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835699 Date: 11/17/2021 
3 
That clarity of purpose and steadiness of pursuit is 
represented here today by several members of Congress present, 
as well as by a number of Executive Branch colleagues from 
across town and across the Potomac. 
But in my mind it is personified by my boss. When Chris 
came to me on Sunday what seems a long time ago and asked me to 
serve as, his Deputy, I had many reasons for overcoming my 
initial (and I might add, lingering) terror at the prospect. 
,One was that I had already seen so much evidence of Chris' good 
sense that I gulped hard and took it on faith that his judgment 
had not utterly failed him in this instance. Another reason 
was that my wife, my mother, and my executive assistant, all 
hope that perhaps, if I spend enough time working in close 
proximity to the Secretary, I may eventually learn how to dress 
-- if not like him, then at least like a diplomat. That's 
probably hopeless, but judging from how much I've already 
learned from Chris in other respects, I do have some hope of 
learning much more -- and that means, first and foremost, 
learning how to take advantage of the opportunities, while 
coping with the uncertainties and adversities, that the nation 
now faces. 
If you'll permit me, I'm making here a rather personal 
point, although I think it applies to statecraft and grand 
strategy as well. More than once in recent months and weeks, 
situations have arisen that required, from whomever was 
representing the Administration at whatever podium or witness 
table, grace under pressure. The paragon of that quality is 
the Secretary of State. He has an ability to lean into the 
wind (without even mussing up that splendid tie of his). He is 
endowed with a higher courtesy that will, when it matters, 
never be mistaken for lack of resolve. 
In conclusion, therefore, let me say this. There is much 
about this new job that is difficult, and I'm going to be 
looking to many of you for help. 
But one thing is easy, and that is defining my overall 
objective. I don't have six or four or even two such goals. I 
have one. And it is to make Secretary Christopher glad that,he 
conferred on me this trust, this honor, and chance to learn 
from him and to join him in serving our country. 
Thank you all very much. 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835699 Date: 11/17/2021