[Page 1]
CO6835916 :IED U.S. DepartmentofState Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835916 Date: 11/17/2021 
Net . • A 
-}TECRLIT-
RELEASE IN FULL 
DECLASSIFIED 
September 27,, 1994 
To: Secretary Christopher and Tony Lake 
From: Strobe Talbott 
Subject: Handling Yeltsin 
The following assessment of Boris Yeltsin's frame of mind 
and recommendation on how President Clinton should deal with him today and tomorrow is based on a long, private talk last night 
with Georgi Mamedov. Mamedov is as worried as I've ever seen him 
about the interaction of Russian and Ameritan domestic politics. 
Yeltsin comes to Washington with one concern above all 
others: Is President Clinton still committed to helping Yeltsin 
and the reformers build a strong, unif'ied, democratic Russia that enjoys respect and exercises influence in the world? Advisers 
and political manipulators, whom Mamedov calls "Iagos," have been whispering in Yeltsin's ear. They are trying to fan suspicions 
that there are "forces" in the U.S., including in the 
Administration, that want to "contain" Russia, exploit its 
current weakness. They argue that President Clinton is facing 
huge opposition domestically and therefore may yield to pressures 
from "anti-Russian elements" in the Congress. Yeltsin still has 
fundamental confidence in President Clinton, but he needs 
reassurance. 
Mamedov urges that the President avoid being drawn into the 
weeds on any of the contentious issues; instead, he should 
concentrate on an overall theme: "working together, building on 
our common interests, we can continue to accomplish a lot." On 
the specifics: 
o COCOM: This is in the too-hard category for resolution at 
this summit. Message: "Boris, our experts are doing their 
best, but so far that's not good enough. What you should 
know is that -- just as I told you at Vancouver -- I'm 
determined to work with you to bring Russia into all the 
major institutions of the post-Cold War world. Let's 
resolve that we'll try to get this solved once and for all 
by the CSCE summit in Budapest." 
-- The Vice President's telephone call to Chernomyrdin 
on this subject angered Yeltsin. some advisers put a 
mischievous spin on it, saying that it was an attempted 
end-run on Yeltsin himself (an indication of how raw 
nerves are in Moscow these days). 
o Nuclear Posture Review: The Russians are interpreting the 
American backgrounding as highly invidious to them: we're 
keeping our powder dry for another arms race if necessary; 
we don't believe they're reducing their strategic forces 
--"OrcREV-
Declassification Authority: Geoffrey W. Chapman, Senior Reviewer, A/GIS/IPS 
10/14/2020 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835916 Date: 11/17/2021

[Page 2]
C 0 6 8 3 5 916 IED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835916 Date: 11/17/2021 
-13-eeRw—
fast enough; we're not serious about START III. Defense 
Minister Grachev beat up on Bill Perry over this yesterday. 
Again, without getting into substance or backing off in the 
least on our actual policy, the message can be:-"You're 
simply misinformed on this. The NPR is a dramatic and 
positive response to what our countries have accomplished. 
I'm telling my own people that for the first time in 50 
years, we don't regard Russia as an enemy, and we're 
adjusting our military posture accordingly. We're totally 
committed to arms control beyond START II. I believe Bill 
Perry was able to clarify our thinking and our intentions 
with Grachev on Monday. His Deputy, John Deutch, is coming 
to Moscow in a few weeks, and he'll be prepared to go deep 
into the details." 
o NATO: "Our people haVe worked out a good statement on 
European security. It makes clear that we regard Russia as 
a key participant in the process of building new structures 
in Europe. I promise you that we're not going to spring any 
surprises on you. Quite the contrary, we're going to work 
together on this problem, taking account of the interets of 
all the emerging democracies, notably including Russia. You 
and I personally are going to keep in close touch on this. 
This is one of the most important common tasks in which 
we're joined. My goal continues to be integration --
resisting the temptation of creating new divisions, or re-
creating old ones." 
o BOSNIA: "This is a prime example of where we've already done 
a lot together. We've got to keep the Contact Group 
together -- not just for the sake of peace in the former 
Yugoslavia, but for the sake of Russian-American 
cooperation. Just in the last few days, I think the Bosnian 
government has given us a way to defer the issue of lifting 
the arms embargo. By the way, I know how hard Andrei 
Kozyrev has worked on this issue, and he's made a very 
important contribution. Tell him I said so. Secretary 
Christopher values him immensely. You and I have to do 
diverything we can to make it possible for Andrei and Chris 
to stay together on this issue.m 
-82eltET-
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06835916 Date: 11/17/2021