[Page 1]
C 0 6 8 3 412 3 FIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06834123 Date: 11/17/2021 
. STROBE TALBOTT 
2812 Calvert St., NW 
Washington, DC 20008 
Martin Walker 
The Guardian 
1730 Rhode Island Ave, NW 
Suite 502 
Washington, DC 20036 
RELEASE IN FULL 
Feb. 12 94 
Dear Martin: 
As perhaps you can imagine, my in-box is barely 
distinguishable from my trash can, only messier. Which is to say, 
I receive all sorts of stuff, much of it entirely deserving of 
close attention, but which I never get around to and end up 
dumping. Not so with your essay. In part because you wrote it 
(and I truly do admire your stuff), in part because Derek told me 
to read it (and I try always to obey him), I settled down and 
purused it this weekend. It's an extremely impressive, 
stimulating, and -- from my standpoint, most important -- useful 
piece of work. I congratulate you and thank you. 
I would also, if I had more energy on a Saturday afternoon, 
argue with some of your more pessimistic judgments. I don't think 
that the post-Dec. 12 plight of the reformers is quite as bleak or 
terminal as you do; nor that the era of G-7 macroeconomic 
engagement is over; nor that George Bush's poodle is destined t6 be 
quite the pit bull your piece suggests. 
Never mind. There's much that I do agree with, and much that 
my colleagues and I could benefit from thinking -- and hearing --
about further. 
The nub of your prescription -- that we engage more directly 
with the CIS as such, particularly for purposes of encouraging 
healthier economic trends -- poses, as I'm sure you realize, a 
political problem of some magnitude: the CIS's legitimacy, in the 
West's eyes, is inversely proportional to the perception, also in 
the West's eyes, that the CIS's real function, in many Russian 
eyes, is to re-establish the Union. That may be the least 
felicitous sentence I've written in a long time, but I think you 
get the drift. The next several months will be important. I'm 
hopeful that we can work quietly with the Russians to get them to 
take a number of steps -- in the Baltics and the Transcaucasus, as 
well as with regard to Ukraine -- that will reassure the world 
about their geopolitical ambitions. If we can do that, it will be 
more possible to pursue ideas like yours that feature the CIS as a 
multilateral interlocutor for the IFIs, etc. 
Are you aware that George Kennan has advocated something quite 
similar to what you propose as an analogue to Keynes' currency 
board for the British-occupied zone around Murmansk? 
As soon as your piece is in some kind of advance proof, please 
send it to me again, so that I can circulate it to some colleagues 
at State, NSC and Treasury. I'm quite serious about that. 
Meanwhile, all the best -- and, again, thanks. 
-1;1 On — 1/ • '1\ I /9 d_ I/ 1 / 
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2017-13804 Doc No. C06834123 Date: 11/17/2021